# Abstract

The low complexity domain of Fused in Sarcoma (FUS-LC consisting of 214 residues) un-

dergoes phase separation, resulting in a dense liquid-like phase that forms early and slowly

matures to reach ordered gel-like state on long time scales. Upon maturation, core-1, compris-

ing of the 57 residues (39-95) in the N-terminus become structured, resulting in the formation

of a non-polymorphic fibril. The truncated FUS-LC-C (residues 110-214) construct forms a

fibril in which core-2 (residues 112-150) adopts a β-sheet structure. Using coarse-grained

1













monomer SOP-IDP model simulations of FUS-LC, we predict that residues 155-190 in the

C-terminal (core-3) form rapidly, followed by core-2, and finally core-1. The time scale of

formation of the cores and their stabilities are inversely correlated, as anticipated by the

Ostwald’s rule of stages. Unbiased multichain simulations show that the chemical potentials

in the two phases are equal and the calculated densities of the dense and dilute phases are

in agreement with experiments. The dense phase, which forms by a nucleation mechanism,

coarsens over time by a process that is reminiscent of Ostwald ripening. AlphaFold predic-

tions of the core-3 structure and the simulations show that β-strand emerges in the core-3

region early during the droplet formation, and drives the initiation of FUS-LC assembly. The

techniques introduced here are general and could be used to probe assembly of other IDPs

such as TDP-43, which shares many features with FUS-LC.

2

# Introduction

Phase separation in polymers, resulting in the coexistence of dense and dilute phases, is

a well known phenomenon in synthetic [1] and biological molecules [2]. Evidence of phase

separation in a mixture of glycoproteins and polysaccharides, and gelatin existed nearly a

century ago [3], which coined the term “complex coacervation” to describe this phenomenon).

The dense phase consisted of polymers and water and the dispersed low density phase was a

solution containing one or more polymers. However, only with the demonstration that phase

separation is an important mechanism of cellular organization there has been a great inter-

est in its relevance in biology and biophysics [4–7]. Several studies have shown that besides

proteins, RNA in complex with proteins and chromatin also phase separate spontaneously

both in vivo and in vitro [8–10]. In many cases, proteins, typically intrinsically disordered

proteins (IDPs) or proteins with disordered regions, could phase separate, at least in in

vitro. Although the vast number of experimental [11], theoretical [12], and computational

studies [13–19] have shed light on the molecular basis of phase separation, many unanswered

questions remain. Here, we investigate the mechanism of droplet growth during phase sep-

aration in Fused in Sarcoma (FUS), an RNA-binding protein, using computer simulations.

Our focus is on the low-complexity (LC) N-terminal domain of FUS (referred to as FUS-LC),

which is critical for its ability to undergo phase separation and to form fibril that bind to

hydrogels [20, 21].

The 214 residue long FUS-LC (the see the sequence in Fig. 1A), which forms non-

polymorphic fibrils, has several unusual attributes that are also shared by other IDPs, such

as TDP43 and hnRNPA1. A number of experimental studies [21, 22], summarized previ-

ously [12], have shown that FUS-LC and related constructs undergo phase separation under

nominal conditions (room temperature and neutral pH). (1) Solid state NMR experiments

showed that, on very long time scales, FUS-LC forms a non-polymorphic fibril in which

residues 39-95 (referred to as core-1) form a cross-β structure with an S-bend topology [20].

In contrast, FUS-LC-C (residues 111-214) also forms a non-polymorphic structure but with

a protolfilament consisting of a dimer (core-2) with each monomer resembling a U-bend in

which only residues 112-150 are structured. The two ordered cores structures do not coex-

3

ist in FUS-LC even though their free energies are similar [23, 24]. (2) A more recent study

demonstrated [21] that a C-terminal region, specifically residues 155 to 190 (core-3), plays a

crucial role in hydrogel binding, which means that it is structured [25]. Using a combination

of tyrosine-to-serine mutations and systematic deletion of residues from the C-terminal ends

of FUS-LC, it was found that mutations in the C-terminal region significantly reduced the

ability of FUS-LC to bind to preformed hydrogels [21]. Surprisingly, even after deleting a

substantial portion of the N-terminal residues (1-61) that includes part of the core-1 residues

(39-61), hydrogel binding was not abolished. These findings indicate that FUS self-assembly

must involve at least two distinct interaction regions, raising the question of how these re-

gions interact to regulate FUS assembly. (3) Deletion of most of the residues in core-2 retains

the ability to bind to the hydrogel. The results, summarized in (2) and (3), suggest that the

FUS-LC domain contains at least two distinct regions that could regulate the self-assembly

of FUS: an N-terminal core-1 (residues 39-95) and a C-terminal core-3 (residues 155-190).

(4) FUS-LC-C (residues 111-214) polymerizes faster than FUS-LC-N (residues 1-110). Con-

versely, thermal denaturation studies showed that the FUS-LC-N polymers are more stable,

requiring higher temperatures for disassembly into soluble monomers, than the FUS-LC-C

polymers.

Here, we used coarse-grained simulations based on the Self-Organized Polymer for Intrin-

sically Disordered Proteins (SOP-IDP) model [26, 27] to first demonstrate that the kinetics

and stability of fibril-like structures are inversely correlated, which explains the experimental

observation described above (item (1)). Second, multichain simulations show that the FUS-

LC droplet forms by a nucleation and growth mechanism that is consistent with Ostwald

ripening, in which the concentration of monomers and oligomers decreases at the expense of

the growth of the dense droplet. The coexisting concentrations between the dense and dilute

phases, which we establish by showing the near-equality of the chemical potentials between

the two phases, are in near-quantitative agreement with experiments. Third, the dense phase

is initially driven by the formation of core-3. SOP-IDP simulations show that key residues

(164-176) adopt the β-strand conformation. The structure of core-3 fibril determined using

AlphaFold shows prominent intra- and interchain contacts in this region. The combination

of molecular simulations and structures derived from AlphaFold has resolved several puz-

4

zles in the FUS-LC assembly and sets the stage applications to other low-complexity IDP

sequences.

Results

Ostwald’s rule of stages: To establish the relationship between the kinetics of formation

of the three cores and their stabilites with respect to the random coil (RC), which is the

ground state, we used the N ∗ theory (summarized in the Supplementary Information) posits

that within the native basin of attraction of the monomer high free-energy conformations

are populated with low probability. In particular, the N ∗ states resemble structural motifs

found in amyloid fibrils [28–30].

The conformations belonging to the N ∗ state are determined using long equilibrium

simulations. We used the structural overlap function, χ (see Eq. 3 in the SI), describing

the similarity between the conformation of the monomer and the structure in the fibril to

characterize the excited states. For core-1 (core-2), we used fibril structure determined using

solid-state NMR [20] (PDB ID: 5W3N; see Fig. 5A) (cryo-EM [23] (PDB ID: 6XFM; see

Fig. S15)). We used AlphaFold2 [31] and AlphaFold3 [32] to generate structures for the

prediction core-3 fibril (see Supplementary Results). We define the N ∗ states as fibril-like

conformations with structural overlap parameters χf ib.i ≥ χc.i, where i = 1, 2, 3 denotes the

core. The procedure for selecting the values of χc.i is described in the SI Methods. The N ∗-

states are populated in the conformational ensemble of monomers at extremely low levels

(usually less than ∼1%). Populations of core-1 and core-2 calculated using long equilibrium

simulations showed [20,24] that core-1 is only modestly more stable than core-2, which makes

the absence of core-2 fibrils in FUS-LC [23] puzzling. Moreover, neither estimates of the time

scales of formation of the fibril-like structures of the three cores nor the fate of core-3 has

been investigated in experiments.

To establish a relation between the kinetics of formation of the three cores to their

stabilities, we calculated the distribution of first passage times, P (τF P T ) =

1 M

M (cid:88)

i=1

δ(τFPT −

τ1k), where τF P T is the first time at which the transition from the random coil (RC) ground

state to the corresponding N ∗ state occurs in the kth trajectory. We associated τFPT with the

5

time at which a structure with χf ib.i ≥ χc.i is reached for the first time in various trajectories.

Using 200 independent Brownian dynamics simulations (see Methods), each lasting 280 ms,

we observed 42 transitions to core-1, 87 transitions to core-2, 116 transitions to the U-

bend conformation of core-3, and 124 transitions to the S-bend conformation of core-3. The

smallest number of transitions to core-1 suggests that it is kinetically least accessible.

Because the first passage time (FPT) is not reached in all the trajectories, only truncated

distributions of FPTs were sampled (Fig. 1B-D) in the simulations. Consequently, only the

lower bounds for the true mean FPTs can be estimated. The error bars represent the standard

error of the mean. We could conclude based on the calculated MFPTs that time for forming

core-3 is the shortest while core-1 forms on the longest time. Because only a small fraction of

the trajectories reach the N ∗ states, there is uncertainty in reaching this conclusion, which

we resolve using a method described below.

To assess the statistical significance of the differences in the mean first-passage times

(MFPTs) to the various N ∗ states, we conducted pairwise comparisons between the MFPT

values using Welch’s unequal variances t-test [33]. The MFPT for core-1 (129.17 ± 11.73

ms) is significantly greater than for core-2 (97.47 ± 8.70 ms), the U-bend conformation of

core-3 (94.17 ± 6.59 ms), and the S-bend conformation of core-3 (99.41 ± 6.61 ms), with

p-values between 0.02 and 0.04. However, the differences between core-2, core-3 U-bend, and

core-3 S-bend are not statistically significant (p > 0.6), nor is the difference between the

two core-3 conformations. The lack of statistical significance is due to the finite duration of

the simulations, which limits the sampling of rare transitions, resulting in underestimation

of the MFPTs. To resolve this issue, we apply a correction described in Eq. 2 below.

Although P (τF P T ), (Fig. 1 (B-D)) is broad, the RC → N ∗ transitions occur by two-

state kinetics. The logarithm of the FPT distributions, ln[τF P T ], which could reveal kinetic

traps as distinct modes [34], shows that the distributions are predominantly unimodal (Fig.

1 (E-G)). Moreover, the fraction of trajectories which have not transited from RC → N ∗ transitions as a function of time, computed as PRC(t) = 1 − (cid:82) t 0 P (τF P T ) dτF P T also exhibit approximately exponential behavior (see Fig. S2F). Thus, we model the transitions using

two-state kinetics, which allows us to approximate P (τF P T ), by an exponential distribution,

P (τF P T ) = λie−λiτF P T , where λi = 1/ (cid:100)⟨τc.i⟩ (Fig. 1H). We estimated the true MFPTs, (cid:100)⟨τc.i⟩

6

using Eq. 2. The precisely calculated MFPT values are (cid:100)⟨τc.1⟩ = 1554 ± 16 ms, (cid:100)⟨τc.2⟩ = 685

± 10 ms, (cid:100)⟨τc.3U ⟩ = 426 ± 7 ms, and (cid:100)⟨τc.3S⟩ = 404.9 ± 7.0 ms (see Fig. 1I). These results

unambiguously show that the order of formation of fibril-like structures is, core-3 followed by

core-2 and finally core-1, (cid:100)⟨τc.1⟩ > (cid:100)⟨τc.2⟩ > (cid:100)⟨τc.3⟩. We should emphasize that MFPT estimates

are only proxies for the times needed to form the fibrils, which occur on timescales of days

in FUS-LC [20, 21, 23, 35].

We then assessed whether the N ∗ states identified in the isolated monomer are struc-

turally distinct from the rest of the conformational ensemble by comparing the residue-wise

propensity for β-strand formation in fibril-like conformations—defined by χf ib.i > χc for each

core i = 1, 2, 3—denoted as pc.i

β , to that in the remainder of the ensemble, which predom-

inantly consists of random-coil-like structures. Let pRC

β

be the residue-dependent β-strand

content in fibril-like N ∗ states (see Fig. S3). For each core i, the ratio pc.i

β /pRC β

exceeds unity

primarily within the corresponding core region of FUS-LC. This finding provides strong evi-

dence that the N ∗ states, although sampled by the isolated monomer, capture key structural

features of fibril-like conformations. We also calculated the radius of gyration (Rg) and end-

to-end distance (Ree) for the N ∗ states (see Fig. S4). The core-1 fibril-like conformations

(χf ib.1 > χc) are more compact compared to both the random coil ensemble and the fibril-

like conformations associated with core-2 and core-3 (see Fig. S4C). In contrast, core-2 and

core-3 fibril-like conformations exhibit Rg and Ree values that are more similar to those of

the random coil states.

Having shown that the excited states in the monomer ensemble are fibril-like structures,

we calculated the relative stabilities of the three N ∗ states (see SI Methods) sampled in

the equilibrium Langevin simulations of FUS-LC. The free energy difference between the

core-1 and core-2 is ∆F1,2 = −0.93 ± 0.13 kcal/mol, which is reasonably close to the value

obtained from solubility measurements [23], 0.35 ± 0.19 kcal/mol. The relative stability of

core-2 with respect to the U-bend topology of core-3 is ∆F2,3U = −7.37 ± 0.15 kcal/mol.

Among the core-3 variants, the one with the S-bend topology is more stable than the U-

bend conformation (∆F3S,3U = −5.59 ± 0.12 kcal/mol), while both are less stable than core-2

(∆F2,3S = −1.78±0.11 kcal/mol). The stability hierarchy is reflected in the energy differences

∆F1,3U = −8.29 ± 0.22 kcal/mol and ∆F1,3S = −2.70 ± 0.10 kcal/mol. Strikingly, the rates

7

of formation of the three fibril-like structures are inversely correlated with with free energy

differences between different cores (see Fig. 1I), which is in accord with the Ostwald’s rule

of stages, found previously in dipeptide supramolecular polymers [36].

Absence of core-3 accelerates the formation of core-1 and core-2: We repeated the

calculations described above for FUS-LC-N (residues 1–163) to illustrate the effect of core-3

on the kinetics of core-1 and core-2 formation. In 200 Brownian trajectories, each lasting 60

ms, there are 16 transitions to core-1 and 100 transitions to core-2. The values of the MFPTs,

estimated from the completed transitions are: ⟨τc.1|s⟩ = 31.03±4.6 ms, ⟨τc.2|s⟩ = 27.41±1.7 ms

(see Fig. S2). The unimodal (Fig. S2) distributions of the FPTs imply P (τFPT) = λie−λiτFPT,

allows us to calculate the true MFPTs, (cid:100)⟨τc.i⟩, using Eq. 2. We find that (cid:100)⟨τc.1⟩ = 694.97 ± 0.01

ms, (cid:100)⟨τc.2⟩ = 85.14 ± 0.002 ms (see Fig. 1J). Equilibrium simulations of FUS-LC-N yielded a

free energy difference between core-1 and core-2 of ∆F1,2 = −2.24 ± 0.06 kcal/mol. As is the

case for FUS-LC, the formation rates of fibril-like structures and the free energy differences

between the competing core structures in FUS-LC-N are inversely correlated (see Fig. 1J).

Interestingly, core-1 and core-2 form 3-fold and 11-fold slower in FUS-LC than in FUS-LC-N,

which lacks core-3 except for 9 residues (full core-3 consists of 36 residues). This finding is

sufficient to conclude that core-3 must play a key role in the assembly of FUS-LC (however,

see below).

Droplet formation and Ostwald ripening: We initiated five multi-chain simulations

from five distinct initial conformations in a homogeneous solution containing 200 randomly

distributed FUS-LC chains (refer to Methods; see also a top panel in Fig. 2A; see also Fig.

S5). The box size corresponded to an overall protein concentration of 600 µM, which is larger

than the typical range (100-250 µM [37, 38]) used in in vitro experiments but is sufficiently

low to observe both the condensed and dilute phases in equilibrium (see Fig. 2A).

The unbiased simulations show that oligomers of different sizes form spontaneously (see

Supplementary Movie 1). We divided the oligomers into three groups: small oligomers (2-9

proteins), large oligomers (10-31 proteins), small droplets (32-70 proteins), and large droplets

(¿ 70 proteins). At the start of the simulations (t < 0.1 × 109τ , where τ is a simulation time

step defined in Methods), the FUS-LC monomers quickly coalesce into small oligomers, which

rapidly disintegrate into monomers and reassemble repeatedly. At intermediate times, some

8

of the small oligomers act as nucleation sites, leading to the formation of large oligomers. The

initial clustering is in accord with the expectations of the classical nucleation theory (CNT)

for the formation of the subcritical nuclei [39]. Eventually, one of the oligomers serves as a

nucleation site, leading to the spontaneous formation of a small droplet at t > 0.5×109τ . The

transition from a subcritical to a supercritical nucleus is a hallmark of CNT, signifying the

instant when the nucleus exceeds the critical radius and initiates the stable growth of a large

FUS droplet (see Figs. 2 and S5). The onset time for stable droplet growth varies significantly

across different simulation runs (see Fig. 2), suggesting that the droplet assembles by multiple

pathways, which is also consistent with CNT predictions.

Most commonly, monomers disintegrate from the oligomers or smaller droplets, thus

exposing a higher fraction of sites to the solvent (modeled implicitly here). These are subse-

quently reincorporated into larger droplets, which is reminiscent of Ostwald ripening [40,41],

a phenomenon in which less stable smaller droplets or oligomers disintegrate into monomers

(see Figs. 2C and S9A; see also Supplementary Movie 2) due to their higher surface en-

ergy and chemical potential (see Fig. 3C). Such monomers subsequently diffuse and are

re-incorporated into larger droplets or oligomers, which are free energetically more favor-

able because of their lower surface-to-volume ratio and reduced interfacial energy. In our

simulations, the higher fraction of solvent-exposed sites in smaller droplets (see Fig. S6) ac-

celerates their dissolution, effectively supplying material for the growth of larger droplets, as

anticipated by Ostwald ripening [41,42]. This process results in the coarsening of the system

over time, with larger droplets becoming more prominent while smaller ones diminish. The

observed dynamics highlight the interplay between thermodynamic stability and molecular

exchange, which governs the temporal evolution of the phase-separated FUS-LC droplets.

Monomer conformations in the dilute and dense phase are similar but not iden-

tical: We compared the Small-Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS) profiles (I(q) with q being

the scattering wave vector) calculated for FUS-LC chains within the droplet to I(q) in

the dispersed phase (see Fig. 3A). The profiles were virtually indistinguishable from each

other, which is consistent with several experimental studies on FUS-LC of varying sequence

length. (1) In a recent work [43], NMR signals for FUS NTD (residues 1-267) were in-

distinguishable between the dilute and condensed phases. Similar conclusions were reached

9

using solid-state NMR studies of FUS-LC [44]. (2) Solution-state NMR studies of FUS-LC-N

(residues 1-163) [45] showed no significant conformational changes upon phase separation on

the timescale of the experiment. (3) Double electron-electron resonance (DEER) spectroscopy

studies of FUS NTD, consisting of residues (1-267) [46] also showed that the conformational

similarity of FUS in dilute and condensed phases. The measured distance distributions be-

tween selected pairs of residues within FUS NTD monomers inside and outside the condensed

phase were similar [46]. We calculated these distributions between the same set of residues in

FUS-LC and found that they are similar both the phases (Fig. 4). The averages and standard

deviations of these distances show reasonable agreement with those reported for FUS NTD

(see Table S4; see also Fig. 4). (4) The inferred distances between the N-terminal residue and

three selected residues in FUS-LC-N monomers both inside and outside the droplet using

experiments smFRET [47] showed only a modest increase in the condensed phase. We com-

puted the same distances for FUS-LC and similarly observed a minor increase for monomers

inside droplets (see Fig. S11). This increase in distance between the N-terminal and other

residues suggests a modest degree of monomer unwinding within the condensed phase, which

is also reflected in the distributions of the radius of gyration (Rg) and end-to-end distance

(Ree) for FUS-LC proteins inside and outside the droplet (see Fig. S11).

Inherent Structures (IS): The findings described above show that while the conforma-

tions of monomeric FUS-LCs remain largely similar in homogeneous and phase-separated en-

vironments, subtle structural differences emerge in the latter. To further investigate this, we

calculated the residue-dependent β-strand propensity of FUS-LC monomers in both the en-

vironments (see SI Methods) (see Fig. 3D). The overall β-strand propensity remains low, sug-

gesting that monomeric FUS-LCs inside droplets are also disordered. However, the monomers

within droplets have nearly threefold higher propensity for β-strand formation compared to

free monomers (see Fig. 3D). To ascertain that the strand content is enhanced in the droplet,

we determined its inherent structure (IS) [48] using a method that was introduced to probe

packing in dense liquids. The IS, which locates local minima in the energy landscape, was

determined by quenching the conformation of the droplet to a low temperature. We find

that the β-strand (see Fig.3E) content is typically greater in the cores than elsewhere. In

particular, the greater β-strand content in core-3 shows that there is a higher tendency for

10

structural ordering in this region even before core-1 forms, which is consistent with exper-

imental observations [21] and Ostwald’s rule of stages (see Fig. 1). It is worth bearing in

mind that fibrils form only on times scales on the order of days [20, 21, 35], which implies

that the droplets in our simulations and experiments [45] are metastable.

Chemical potentials in the two phases are similar: For t > 3.5 × 109 τ , a stable

droplet forms from which only the monomers disassociate on long time scales (see Fig. 2).

However, polymer chains chains exhibit continuous dynamic exchange, moving in and out of

the droplet (see Fig. 2B; see also Supplementary Movie 3), as required for phase equilibrium.

To ensure that we characterize the equilibrium state of the condensate, we discarded the

first 3.5 × 109τ time steps in the trajectory. To assess that equilibrium is established, we

calculated the chemical potentials in the condensed (µc) and dispersed (µd) phases using

the approach described in SI. We assumed that the polymers that are not in the condensed

phase constitute the dispersed phase. In other words, the variations in the oligomer sizes

found in the dispersed phase are not treated as separate species. The relative difference, ∆µ = (⟨µc⟩ − ⟨µd⟩)/⟨µc⟩, is 0.003 ± 0.03. The large error bars that exceed the mean value

are due the finite system size (see Fig. S7).

The similarity between the chemical potential distributions of the two phases, Pd(µ)

and Pc(µ) (see Fig. 3B), was assessed using the Jensen-Shannon divergence (JSD) (see SI

Methods). The calculated divergence, DJS(Pd(µ) ∥ Pc(µ)) = 0.01. The small value of the JSD

shows that the two distributions are similar. Because their mean values are comparable, we

surmised that the observed differences arise from the larger variance in µ for the condensed

phase (see Fig. 3B). Given that the system size that can be reliably simulated is small

(maximum of 200 chains), the conclusion that the chemical potentials between the coexisting

phases are similar is unreasonable.

Concentrations of the coexisting phases: The establishment of the equality of the

chemical potentials in the two phases allows us to reliably calculate the coexisting protein

concentrations (see SI Methods for details). The average FUS-LC concentration of the con-

densed phase is ρc = (16.24 ± 8 × 10−4) mM (see, Figs. 2D and 3H; see also Fig. S12B),

which is in excellent agreement with a few experiments. Raman imaging experiments were

used to estimate the dense phase concentration to be 15.0 mM under standard conditions

11

(pH 7.6 and 150 mM NaCl) [37]. An independent study using quantitative phase imaging

reported that the FUS-LC concentration in the condensed phase to be 337.3 mg/mL (15.7

mM, assuming a molecular weight of 21.5 kDa for FUS-LC) [49], which is comparable to

the 20 mM concentration reported for FUS NTD (residues 1-267) [46]. The average FUS-LC

concentration in the dispersed phase in the simulations is ρd = (0.28 ± 2 × 10−4) mM (see,

Fig. 3H), which is in reasonable agreement with the experimentally reported concentration

of ≈ 100 µM [46, 50]. In our simulations we observed that on average there are 114.80 ± 0.05

FUS-LC chains in the condensed phase, while 85.2 ± 0.05 are in the dilute phase (see Figs.

2C and 3G), which agrees with experimental estimates [46]. The elevated overall protein

concentration used in the simulations likely results in the larger value ρd of the low density

phase. The density of the droplet calculated using simulations is about ≈ 58 higher than in

the dispersed phase. The corresponding experimental value is ≈ 157. The good agreement

between the simulations and several experiments further validates our model.

Mechanism of droplet formation: Given that the chains in the droplet are disordered, it

is natural to wonder if specific interactions between the FUS-LC polymers initiate phase sep-

aration. To address this issue, we analyzed interchain interactions. The results, which were

qualitatively consistent across all the simulation runs, are illustrated in Figs. S8 and S9. At

short times, interchain interactions are rare because most proteins exist as free monomers

or small oligomers. However, the majority of interchain interactions that form during the

early times are mediated by the core-3 region, with frequent interactions between residues

164-176 of one protein and the corresponding residues of another. Subsequently, other non-

preferential interactions, which are intermittent and disrupted over time, are observed. The

contacts between residues 164-176 consistently form the most populated interchain interac-

tions. Interactions mediated by core-1 are discernible only at later stages of droplet formation,

with preferential contacts involving core-1 residues 61-77. Interestingly, amino acid residues

in core-2 (residues 112-150) do not engage in preferential interactions at either the beginning

of the simulation (Figs. S8 and S9) or not at later stages (Fig. 3I), except when mediated by

core-1 or core-3. At equilibrium, interactions between core-2 regions of different chains are

the least probable (see Fig. 3I), a finding that supports the observation that core-2 is not

required to bind to hydrogels [21].

12

These findings were derived using simulations conducted at low friction, which could alter the

kinetic pathways and the temporal order of events. To mitigate these effects, we performed

additional five independent Brownian dynamics simulations for a system of 64 FUS proteins

in a solvent with viscosity set to 10−3 Pa·s (see Methods). In the first 150 µs of each simula-

tion, transient oligomers containing 4-8 chains form and dissociate (see Fig. S9A), in accord

with the results from low-friction simulations (see Fig. 2). Analysis of the interchain inter-

actions during Brownian dynamics further revealed that residues 164-176 primarily mediate

contacts between the chains in the oligomers (see Fig. S9). From the temporal progression

of the contact maps (see Fig. S9C), we find that condensate formation is initiated from

oligomers that act as nucleation sites, predominantly involving core-3. This suggests that

core-3 plays a central role in mediating droplet formation (see below). This is further sup-

ported by the interaction patterns observed in dimers and small oligomers (fewer than 10

chains; see Fig. S9D): although the core-1 region also participates in interchain interactions,

their relative contribution decreases in larger oligomers, where core-3-mediated interactions

become dominant.

Core 3 residues drive FUS-LC condensation: It is surprising that the most frequent

and the strongest interchain interactions are mediated by the C-terminal tail of FUC-LC,

particularly residues 164SSGGGGGGGGGGN176 (see Fig. 3F,I). Strikingly, these residues

have the highest propensity to form β-strands at the monomer level (see Figs. 3D and S10).

The relevance of core-3 in FUS-LC assembly was demonstrated [21] by systematically trun-

cating residues from C terminus, and probing their ability to bind to hydrogel. Truncation

beyond residue 180 resulted in a complete loss of the ability of GFP-tagged test proteins to

bind to mCherry hydrogels formed by the intact FUS-LC (see Fig. 2A in ref. [21]), thus sug-

gesting that residues that are critical for FUS-LC condensate formation is within the 165-180

range. This finding is supported by our simulations which show that the most probable in-

teractions are mediated by residues 164-176. In addition, our simulations show that residues

71TPQGYGSTGGYGSS84 (Fig. 3F,I) also form several interchain interactions within the

droplet. Kato and McKnight also systematically created FUS-LC variants by truncating

chunks of residues from the N terminus (see Fig. 2B in ref. [21]). The results of these ex-

periments show that the crucial residues for FUS-LC hydrogel binding activity are within

13

residues 61-77, which also aligns with our simulation results. The early formation of struc-

ture in residues (164-176), containing mostly Glycines, the absence of discernible order in

core-2, and emergence of order late in core-1 show that core-3 that initiates the assemblly of

FUS-LC.

Structural model for core-3: In light of the importance of core-3 in FUS-LC assembly, we

used to AlphaFold2 (AF2; [31]) and AlphaFold3 (AF3; [32]) to predict the unknown struc-

ture of core-3. To assess the reliability of AF2 and AF3, we first determined the structures of

core-1 and core-2 and compared them to the experimentally resolved counterparts (see Figs.

5 and S15 for AF3). AlphaFold3 generates structurally diverse models of the fibrils based on

different random seeds [51]. Although the predicted and experimentally derived structures

deviate to some extent, the majority of residues that form β-sheet secondary structures in

the experimental fibrils are also found in β-sheets in the AF3-predicted models (see Supple-

mentary Results for details). Moreover, the predictions are sufficiently accurate to validate

Ostwald’s rule of stages. This conclusion is based on a comparison of mean first-passage

times (MFPTs) computed using both AF3-predicted and experimental fibril structures (see

Supplementary Results for details).

To assess the reliability of the AF3 predictions, we analyzed the quality metrics provided

by AlphaFold—pLDDT, iPTM, and pTM [32]. These metrics exhibited substantial variability

depending on the chain configuration. By examining their distributions across different chain

numbers (see SI for details), we determined the most reliable structural model (Fig. S14). For

FUS155−190 fibrils, which consist of four subunits (Fig. S15D), we observed higher pLDDT,

iPTM, and pTM values compared to other assemblies (see Fig. S14). The selected core-3

fibril model had the highest values across all three quality metrics: iPTM, pTM, and average

pLDDT (see Table S3). These values fall within the typical range observed for amyloid

fibrils [51]. A similar analysis for FUS141−214, which forms core-3 fibrils experimentally [21],

revealed that the optimal structural model also consisted of a four-subunit complex (Fig. 5C),

with iPTM, pTM, and average pLDDT (see Table S3). Given the experimental confirmation

of core-3 fibril formation for this sequence, we adopted the structures derived for FUS141−214

in further analysis.

AF3 predictions show that the two outer extended segments of core-3 correspond to

14

residues 155–163 and 182–190, while the inner segment consists of residues 168–177 (Fig.

5C). Within this architecture, residues 156–163 and 172–190 form β-strands in a serpentine-

like β-sheet arrangement, whereas residues 164–166 adopt a β-turn conformation that fa-

cilitates chain reversal. Residues 155 and 167–172 remain in a random coil conformation.

Figures S16A and S16B display per-atom pLDDT scores for the FUS155−190 and FUS141−214

fibrils, respectively. The monomeric unit in the FUS155−190 fibril adopts a U-bend topology

with a ”kinked” region spanning residues 176–184 (Fig. S15D). In contrast, the core-3 re-

gion (residues 155–190) of the FUS141−214 monomer adopts an S-bend topology (Fig. 5C).

Interestingly, the ”kinked” region (residues 176–184) is conserved across both models.

Given that core-3 forms cross-β polymers [21], we used the predicted structures to de-

termine the residue dependent secondary structural propensity [52]. Both the U-bend and

S-bend topologies exhibited a β-sheet secondary structure throughout most residues (see

Figs. S16C,D). Additionally, residues 164-176, which showed strong inter-chain interactions

in our simulations (Figs. 2 and S9), also displayed prominent intra- and interchain contacts in

the predicted core-3 fibrils (see Figs. S16E,F). This result further highlights the importance

of core-3 in mediating interactions critical for fibril assembly.

Discussion

The in-depth study of phase separation in the low complexity domain of FUS and its variants

has resolved a few long-standing problems related to its assembly. For instance, based on the

weak interactions between the polymer chains, one would expect that there are no preferential

contacts between the chains within the droplet. Unexpectedly, our simulations reveal that

interchain interactions involving residues 164–176 (the center of the core-3) are structured

early and initiate the formation of the FUS-LC droplet, which implies that the presence

of structure in core-3 propagates to core-1 over time. Importantly, the lack of interchain

contacts associated with core-2 (Figs. 3, S8, and S9) supports the experimental finding that

its formation is not essential for hydrogel binding [21]. Besides these conclusions, there are

several other findings whose implications are explored below.

Nucleation and Ostwald ripening: Droplet formation and growth takes place in two

15

steps. In the first step, monomers collide to form oligomers that frequently disintegrate until

one with a critical size emerges (see Supplementary Movie 1), which subsequently grows to a

larger droplet forms. In the second step, excess monomers (and possibly small oligomers) are

“devoured” (the word used in [41]) by largest droplet leading to the coarsening of the con-

densate (see Supplementary Movie 2). The simulations vividly illustrate the two processes.

During progressive coarsening larger droplets become increasingly dominant (“winner take

all” scenario [53]) as the smaller ones shrink. The observed dynamics underscore the bal-

ance between thermodynamic stability and molecular exchange, which dictates the temporal

evolution of the phase-separated FUS-LC droplets.

Our study provides a structural perspective on the nucleation and growth of the droplet,

bridging the initial nucleation events described by Classical Nucleation Theory (CNT) with

the long-time coarsening governed by Ostwald ripening (see Supplementary Movie 1). Be-

cause of the structural heterogeneity of monomers and oligomers, nucleation mechanism may

be most efficient only when a subset of structures of the heterogeneous conformations are

involved. Indeed, the relevance of the heterogeneous structures sampled in the dispersed

phase in controlling the droplet formation is supported by theoretical and experimental find-

ings [54, 55]. Despite the complexity, remnants of CNT are evident in the droplet growth.

Our simulations show that the dependence of droplet stability on size is in accord with both

theoretical frameworks: CNT establishes a critical nucleus size required for stable growth,

while Ostwald ripening explains the preferential growth of larger droplets at the expense of

smaller ones. The simulations capture this size-dependent behavior, elucidating its role in

shaping the overall droplet population dynamics.

Core-3 structure prediction: To determine the kinetics of core-1 and core-2 formation

using the spectrum of monomer states, we utilized the known experimental structures for

reference [20, 23]. To determine the rate of formation of core-3, we relied on the structures

predicted by AlphaFold. Although there is some variability among the structures, core-3 is

predicted to have both a U-bend and S-bend topologies, with the same residues positioned

at the kink. Using the structural overlap parameter, we calculated the mean first passage

times and found them to be similar for both types of structures. This shows the conclusions

pertaining to Ostwalds’s rule of stages are robust even if alternative conformations predicted

16

by AlphaFold are used (Fig. S20). We do not claim that any of the predicted structures

of core-3 are correct in reality. Indeed, the performance of AlphaFold for IDRs and even

for fold-switching proteins has been criticized [51, 56, 57]. Despite these caveats, our results

for FUS-LC are in excellent agreement with experiments [21], suggesting that predicted

structural models for core-3 are likely to be reasonable.

Ostwald’s rule of stages: The detection of the excited N ∗ fibril-like structures the spectrum

of monomers [24] informs our understanding of fibrillar assemblies in IDPs and proteins that

have a high propensity to aggregate [22,30,58]. The inverse correlation between the stability

of the fibril cores and the kinetics of their formation, demonstrated from the knowledge

of the N ∗ states, is accord with the Ostwald rule of stages that was previously shown for

dipeptide supramolecular polymers [59] and Aβ peptides [60]. Our simulations establish

that determination of the N ∗ states, perhaps by relaxation dispersion nuclear magnetic

resonance spectroscopy [58,61] or by time resolved solid state NMR [62], would be important

in anticipating the mechanism of condensate formation and subsequent transition to fibrils. It

is worth noting that the validity of the Ostwald’s rule of stages is shown using the structures

of the monomer N ∗ states. In actuality, FUS-LC fibrils form on time scales on the order

of days [20, 21, 35]. Nevertheless, we expect that Ostwald’s rule would hold as the droplets

transition to a solid.

Although the N ∗ conformations sampled by the isolated monomer are structural proxies

for their conformation within core-1, core-2, or core-3 fibrils, our results show that these

regions exhibit an increased propensity to form β-strand in the corresponding regions of

FUS-LC (see Fig. S3) even at the early stages of assembly. Thus, our findings validate

the relevance of N ∗ states in characterizing fibril formation even though they are sampled

in isolated monomers but exhibit structural features that mirror those in the fibrils. This

observation accords well with previous studies indicating that such N ∗ states, though rarely

populated under native conditions, are encoded within the monomer’s free energy landscape

and can serve as precursors to aggregation-prone conformations [30].

Role of core-3: The mutual exclusion in the formation of core-1 and core-3 structures was

established using ALS-associated mutations [21]. Our simulations provide indirect evidence

for this key finding. It is based on a comparison of the MFPTs for fibril-like conformations

17

in FUS-LC and FUS-LC-N (see Figs. 1 and S2). The absence of the core-3 facilitates the

formation of core-1 and core-2, implying that core-3 either energetically or through steric

interactions hinders these transitions. The increased β-strand propensity in the core-1 region

of FUS-LC-N compared to FUS-LC further shows that the presence of core-3 suppresses the

cores with greater stability (see Fig. S10). Importantly, the relative stability between core-1

and core-2, ∆F1,2, increases from −0.93 ± 0.13 kcal/mol in FUS-LC to −2.24 ± 0.06 kcal/mol

in FUS-LC-N. The enhanced stability suggests that core-3 exerts a greater destabilizing effect

on core-1 than on core-2, further supporting its role in modulating fibril formation pathways.

Implication for FUS-LC assembly: Our results confirm that the thermodynamically

more stable core-1 compared to core-3 (∆F1,3S = −2.70 ± 0.10 kcal/mol) forms significantly

later than core-3 in FUS-LC (see Fig. 1I). Kinetic studies revealed that core-3 forms within 50

hours of incubation (see Fig. in Ref. [21]). In contrast, core-1 forms only after an incubation

period of 5–7 days [20]. The combination of kinetic and thermodynamic findings suggests

that core-3 must transition into core-1 over time. Although core-1 and core-3 do not coexist

in FUS-LC, our kinetic studies of FUS1-163 shows that the absence of the core-3 region

facilitates the formation of core-1. The time to form fibril-like core-1 structure decreases by

a factor of ≈4 in FUS-LC-N compared to FUS-LC (compare Figs. 1 I and J). This implies

that, at the early stages of FUS-LC assembly, core-3 likely hinders core-1 formation. The

mutual exclusivity of core-1 and core-3 was previously shown in experiments [21] using ALS-

associated mutations.

Our simulations predict that in FUS-LC core-2 fibril-like structures form after core-

3 but before core-1. Experiments demonstrated that core-2 is not required for hydrogel

binding [21], which accords well with our simulations that show that there are a limited

number of interchain contacts between the core-2 regions in FUS-LC monomers within the

condensates (see Fig. 3). The scarcity of favorable interactions likely impedes the formation

of stable core-2 fibrils. The destabilization of core-2 could also arise from entropic repulsion

between the “fuzzy coats” surrounding the ordered regions of the non-polymorphic FUS-LS

fibrils [20, 23].

Finally, there are similarities between FUS-LS and the low complexity domain of the TAR

DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP- 43). In the latter, core-1 (“aggregation” core) and core-2

18

(about 10 residues outside of core-1) transition from liquid to solid morphology [63]. The

ordered cores do not typically coexist (as in FUS-LC) and form on different time scales [64].

It appears that Ostwald’s rule of stages should be manifested in TDP-43 as well. The gen-

erality of the results discovered here (Ostwald’s rule, nucleation and growth of condensates,

maturation of droplets into fibrils an extremely long time scales) for other low complexity

sequences remains to be established.

Methods

Transition to fibril-like monomer N ∗ states: Previously, we showed that the monomer

ensemble has fingerprints of sparsely populated high free energy conformations with high

degree of similarity to monomers in the fibrils [24]. Such conformations, belonging to the N ∗

state, may be determined using long equilibrium simulations. The N ∗ states were identified

using the structural overlap parameter (see Eq. (3) in the SI). To calculate the rates of

transition to the N ∗ states, we carried out Brownian dynamics simulations in the high

friction regime, by setting the solvent viscosity of 10−3 Pa.s, which is roughly the water

viscosity. The equation of motion of each bead i, derived by neglecting the inertial term in

Eq. (2) in SI is,

˙qi = −

1 γ

∂USOP −IDP ∂qi

+ Γi.

(1)

We integrated Eq.1 using the Euler algorithm in the custom LAMMPS code [65]. In the over-damped limit, the natural unit of time is τHF = γa2 kBT , where γ = 6πηa, as described previously [66]. With a = 2.88 ˚A, the average bead radius in our model, we obtain τHF =

109.5 ps. To derive reliable estimates of the first passage times (FPTs), we generated Nsim =

200 independent trajectories for each polymer at 298 K. The duration of each trajectories

is 240 ms, which may not sufficient to observe transitions to the N ∗ states. To correct for

this shortcoming the procedure described below to obtain the true estimate of the transition

times to the N ∗ states.

True Mean FPT: Because the duration of the simulation trajectories is finite the transition

19

from the disordered ground state to the N ∗ state cannot be observed in all the trajectories. As

a result, the mean first passage time is underestimated. To correct for the underestimate, we

used the maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) to calculate the true mean FPT, by assuming

that the first passage times FPTs are exponentially distributed. The true mean first passage

time, denoted as ⟨τ ⟩, is given by,

⟨τ ⟩ =

(cid:80)NS

k=1 τk + NE · T NO

.

(2)

The equation above (Eq. 2), derived elsewhere [67] is similar to the approach in [68], accounts

for the contributions from events that occur within the duration (T ) of the simulation tra-

jectory as well those that do not on T . In Eq. 2, τk is the FPT that is less than T , NS is

the number of trajectories, NE denotes the number of simulations where the FPT exceeds T

(indicating cases where the first passage did not occur within T ), and NO is the total number

of observed FPTs that are less than T . The robustness of Eq. 2 was tested across different

values of NS and T . It is worth pointing out that the validity of Eq. 2 was established by

explicit comparisons to precisely solvable models [67].

Multi-chain simulations: Each simulation run was initiated from different initial configu-

ration of the system consisting of 200 polymers. The initial configurations were derived from

five distinct conformations generated in the FUS-LC monomer simulations. The conforma-

tions correspond to a cluster in the ground state (see the Methods in SI). The dimensions

of the monomers, Rg and Ree values, were close to the ensemble average. Each of the five

monomers was replicated 40 times and arranged in a simulation box using PACKMOL soft-

ware [69], ensuring that there are no interactions between monomers in the initial configura-

tion. The distance between the monomers in the initial configuration was 10-15 nm, which is

larger than the average Ree and two-three times larger than the average Rg of FUS-LC (Fig.

S11). We use a temperature (T = 209 K) to facilitate droplet formation under equilibrium

conditions.

All the simulations were carried out at the salt concentration of 150 mM NaCl. To

calculate the inherent structures [48], we quenched the system to a low temperature, by

isolating the droplet and then performed Langevin dynamics at T = 3 K until the potential

20

energy converged. Multi-chain simulations were performed on a GPU using OpenMM [70].

The equations of motion were solved using the leap-frog integration scheme with a time step (cid:112)m0/ε0. Here, m0 = 1 Da represents the of h = 0.05τ , where the natural time unit is, τ = a0 mass scale, a0 = 1 ˚A is the characteristic length scale, and ε0 = 1 kcal/mol sets the energy

scale. To accelerate sampling, simulations were conducted in the underdamped regime by

reducing the effective viscosity of water by a factor of 100. Each trajectory was propagated

for a total of 5 × 109 integration steps.

Clustering: For each snapshot, a monomer was considered part of a cluster (i.e., an oligomer

or droplet) if it was in contact with at least two other monomers within that cluster. Two

monomers were defined to be in contact if there existed at least one pair of residues, i and

j, from the respective monomers such that the distance between their side chains was ≤ 0.8

nm.

Fibril structures: To predict the three-dimensional structures of the fibrils, we employed

AlphaFold2 (AF2; [31]) through ColabFold, a Google-hosted AlphaFold collaborative Jupyter

notebook that facilitates modeling of protein monomers as well as homo- and hetero-oligomeric

complexes [71]. ColabFold was run with default parameters, with the number of subunits

varied to assess the structural diversity. For AlphaFold3 (AF3; [32]) predictions, we used the

AlphaFold Server [32] under default settings. To evaluate the reliability of each predicted

structure, we analyzed multiple AlphaFold metrics: the Predicted local distance difference

test (pLDDT), which reflects confidence in structure predictions; the Template Modeling

(pTM) score and the interface predicted template modeling (ipTM) score, which estimates

the overall quality of the complex and the interfacial interactions within complexes, respec-

tively [31]. The pTM and ipTM scores approximate the Template Modeling (TM) score [72],

providing insights into the predicted structural accuracy. We present these metrics for all

the AlphaFold models in the SI Figs. S14, S16, S17.

Acknowledgments: We are grateful to Steve McKnight and Balaka Mondal for useful

comments and critical reading of the manuscript. LD was partly supported by a Fulbright

Fellowship. This work was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation

(CHE 2320256), and a grant from the Welch Foundation (F-0019) administered through the

Collie-Welch Regents Chair. This work used Bridges-2 [73] at Pittsburgh Supercomputing

21

Center through allocations bio220054p and bio240056p from the Advanced Cyberinfrastruc-

ture Coordination Ecosystem: Services & Support (ACCESS) program, which is supported

by National Science Foundation grants #2138259, #2138286, #2138307, #2137603, and

#2138296. We acknowledge the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) at The Univer-

sity of Texas at Austin for providing computational resources that have contributed to the

research results reported within this paper. URL: http://www.tacc.utexas.edu.

22

References

[1] Paul J Flory. Principles of polymer chemistry. Cornell university press, 1953.

[2] Jan TG Overbeek and Michael J Voorn. Phase separation in polyelectrolyte solu-

tions. theory of complex coacervation. Journal of Cellular and Comparative Physiology,

49(S1):7–26, 1957.

[3] H. G. Bungenberg De Jong and H. R. Kruyt. Coacervation (partial miscibility in colloid

systems). Proc. Royal Academy of Amsterdam, 32:849, 1929.

[4] Clifford P Brangwynne, Christian R Eckmann, David S Courson, Agata Rybarska,

Carsten Hoege, J¨obin Gharakhani, Frank J¨ulicher, and Anthony A Hyman. Germline

p granules are liquid droplets that localize by controlled dissolution/condensation. Sci-

ence, 324(5935):1729–1732, 2009.

[5] Simon Alberti, Amy Gladfelter, and Tanja Mittag. Considerations and challenges in

studying liquid-liquid phase separation and biomolecular condensates. Cell, 176(3):419–

434, 2019.

[6] Salman F Banani, Hyun O Lee, Anthony A Hyman, and Michael K Rosen. Biomolecular

condensates: organizers of cellular biochemistry. Nature reviews Molecular cell biology,

18(5):285–298, 2017.

[7] Jeong-Mo Choi, Alex S Holehouse, and Rohit V Pappu. Physical principles underlying

the complex biology of intracellular phase transitions. Annual Review of Biophysics,

49:107–133, 2020.

[8] Karsten Rippe. Liquid–liquid phase separation in chromatin. Cold Spring Harbor per-

spectives in biology, 14(2):a040683, 2022.

[9] Christine Roden and Amy S Gladfelter. Rna contributions to the form and function of

biomolecular condensates. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 22(3):183–195, 2021.

[10] Tatjana Trcek, Tyler E Douglas, Markus Grosch, Yandong Yin, Whitby VI Eagle, Eliz-

abeth R Gavis, Hari Shroff, Eli Rothenberg, and Ruth Lehmann. Sequence-independent

23

self-assembly of germ granule mrnas into homotypic clusters. Molecular cell, 78(5):941–

950, 2020.

[11] Simon Alberti and Anthony A Hyman. Biomolecular condensates at the nexus of cellular

stress, protein aggregation disease and ageing. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 22(3):196–213,

2021.

[12] D Thirumalai, Abhinaw Kumar, Debayan Chakraborty, John E Straub, and Mauro L

Mugnai. Conformational fluctuations and phases in fused in sarcoma (fus) low-

complexity domain. Biopolymers, 115(2):e23558, 2024.

[13] Joan-Emma Shea, Robert B Best, and Jeetain Mittal. Physics-based computational and

theoretical approaches to intrinsically disordered proteins. Current opinion in structural

biology, 67:219–225, 2021.

[14] Srivastav Ranganathan, Pouria Dasmeh, Seth Furniss, and Eugene Shakhnovich. Phos-

phorylation sites are evolutionary checkpoints against liquid–solid transition in protein

condensates. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 120(20):e2215828120,

2023.

[15] Srivastav Ranganathan and Eugene Shakhnovich. The physics of liquid-to-solid tran-

sitions in multi-domain protein condensates. Biophysical Journal, 121(14):2751–2766,

2022.

[16] Jerelle A Joseph, Aleks Reinhardt, Anne Aguirre, Pin Yu Chew, Kieran O Russell,

Jorge R Espinosa, Adiran Garaizar, and Rosana Collepardo-Guevara. Physics-driven

coarse-grained model for biomolecular phase separation with near-quantitative accuracy.

Nature computational science, 1(11):732–743, 2021.

[17] Gregory L Dignon, Robert B Best, and Jeetain Mittal. Biomolecular phase separation:

from molecular driving forces to macroscopic properties. Annual review of physical

chemistry, 71(1):53–75, 2020.

[18] Giulio Tesei, Thea K Schulze, Ramon Crehuet, and Kresten Lindorff-Larsen. Accurate

model of liquid–liquid phase behavior of intrinsically disordered proteins from opti-

24

mization of single-chain properties. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,

118(44):e2111696118, 2021.

[19] Liguo Wang, Christopher Brasnett, Lu´ıs Borges-Ara´ujo, Paulo CT Souza, and Siewert J

Marrink. Martini3-idp: improved martini 3 force field for disordered proteins. Nature

Communications, 16(1):1–14, 2025.

[20] Dylan T Murray, Masato Kato, Yi Lin, Kent R Thurber, Ivan Hung, Steven L McKnight,

and Robert Tycko. Structure of fus protein fibrils and its relevance to self-assembly and

phase separation of low-complexity domains. Cell, 171(3):615–627, 2017.

[21] Masato Kato and Steven L McKnight. The low-complexity domain of the fus rna

binding protein self-assembles via the mutually exclusive use of two distinct cross-β

cores. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(42):e2114412118, 2021.

[22] Avinash Patel, Hyun O Lee, Louise Jawerth, Shovamayee Maharana, Marcus Jahnel,

Marco Y Hein, Stoyno Stoynov, Julia Mahamid, Shambaditya Saha, Titus M Franz-

mann, et al. A liquid-to-solid phase transition of the als protein fus accelerated by

disease mutation. Cell, 162(5):1066–1077, 2015.

[23] Myungwoon Lee, Ujjayini Ghosh, Kent R Thurber, Masato Kato, and Robert Ty-

cko. Molecular structure and interactions within amyloid-like fibrils formed by a low-

complexity protein sequence from fus. Nature communications, 11(1):5735, 2020.

[24] Abhinaw Kumar, Debayan Chakraborty, Mauro Lorenzo Mugnai, John E Straub, and

D Thirumalai. Sequence determines the switch in the fibril forming regions in the

low-complexity fus protein and its variants. The journal of physical chemistry letters,

12(37):9026–9032, 2021.

[25] M Kato, X Zhou, and SL McKnight. How do protein domains of low sequence complexity

work? RNA, 28:3–15, 2022.

[26] Upayan Baul, Debayan Chakraborty, Mauro L Mugnai, John E Straub, and Devarajan

Thirumalai. Sequence effects on size, shape, and structural heterogeneity in intrinsically

disordered proteins. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 123(16):3462–3474, 2019.

25

[27] Mauro L Mugnai, Debayan Chakraborty, Farkhad Maksudov, Abhinaw Kumar, Hung T

Nguyen, Wade Zeno, Jeanne C Stachowiak, John E Straub, and D Thirumalai. Sizes,

conformational fluctuations, and saxs profiles for intrinsically disordered proteins. Prot.

Sci., 34:e70067, 2025.

[28] John E Straub and D Thirumalai. Toward a molecular theory of early and late events in

monomer to amyloid fibril formation. Annual review of physical chemistry, 62(1):437–

463, 2011.

[29] Mai Suan Li, Nguyen Truong Co, Govardhan Reddy, Chin-Kun Hu, JE Straub, and

D Thirumalai. Factors governing fibrillogenesis of polypeptide chains revealed by lattice

models. Physical review letters, 105(21):218101, 2010.

[30] Pavel I Zhuravlev, Govardhan Reddy, John E Straub, and D Thirumalai. Propensity to

form amyloid fibrils is encoded as excitations in the free energy landscape of monomeric

proteins. Journal of molecular biology, 426(14):2653–2666, 2014.

[31] John Jumper, Richard Evans, Alexander Pritzel, Tim Green, Michael Figurnov, Olaf Ronneberger, Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Russ Bates, Augustin ˇZ´ıdek, Anna Potapenko,

Alex Bridgland, Clemens Meyer, Simon A. A. Kohl, Andrew J. Ballard, Andrew

Cowie, Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Stanislav Nikolov, Rishub Jain, Jonas Adler, Trevor

Back, Stig Petersen, David Reiman, Ellen Clancy, Michal Zielinski, Martin Steinegger,

Michalina Pacholska, Tamas Berghammer, Sebastian Bodenstein, David Silver, Oriol

Vinyals, Andrew W. Senior, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Pushmeet Kohli, and Demis. Hassabis.

Highly accurate protein structure prediction with alphafold. Nature, 596(7873):583–589,

2021.

[32] Josh Abramson, Jonas Adler, Jack Dunger, Richard Evans, Tim Green, Alexander

Pritzel, Olaf Ronneberger, Lindsay Willmore, Andrew J. Ballard, Joshua Bambrick,

Sebastian W. Bodenstein, David A. Evans, Chia-Chun Hung, Michael O’Neill, David Reiman, Kathryn Tunyasuvunakool, Zachary Wu, Akvil˙e ˇZemgulyt˙e, Eirini Arvaniti,

Charles Beattie, Ottavia Bertolli, Alex Bridgland, Alexey Cherepanov, Miles Congreve,

26

Alexander I. Cowen-Rivers, Andrew Cowie, Michael Figurnov, Fabian B. Fuchs, Han-

nah Gladman, Rishub Jain, Yousuf A. Khan, Caroline M. R. Low, Kuba Perlin, Anna

Potapenko, Pascal Savy, Sukhdeep Singh, Adrian Stecula, Ashok Thillaisundaram, Catherine Tong, Sergei Yakneen, Ellen D. Zhong, Michal Zielinski, Augustin ˇZ´ıdek,

Victor Bapst, Pushmeet Kohli, Max Jaderberg, Demis Hassabis, and John. Jumper.

Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular interactions with alphafold 3. Nature,

pages 1–3, 2024.

[33] B. L. Welch. The generalization of ‘student’s’ problem when several different population

variances are involved. Biometrika, 34(1-2):28–35, 1947.

[34] Esmae J Woods and David J Wales. Analysis and interpretation of first passage time

distributions featuring rare events. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 26(3):1640–

1657, 2024.

[35] Raymond F Berkeley, Maryam Kashefi, and Galia T Debelouchina. Real-time observa-

tion of structure and dynamics during the liquid-to-solid transition of fus lc. Biophysical

Journal, 120(7):1276–1287, 2021.

[36] Aviad Levin, Thomas O Mason, Lihi Adler-Abramovich, Alexander K Buell, George

Meisl, Celine Galvagnion, Yaron Bram, Samuel A Stratford, Christopher M Dobson,

Tuomas PJ Knowles, et al. Ostwald’s rule of stages governs structural transitions and

morphology of dipeptide supramolecular polymers. Nature communications, 5(1):5219,

2014.

[37] Kohei Yokosawa, Shinji Kajimoto, Daiki Shibata, Kunisato Kuroi, Tomohiro Konno,

and Takakazu Nakabayashi. Concentration quantification of the low-complexity domain

of fused in sarcoma inside a single droplet and effects of solution parameters. The

Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, 13(24):5692–5697, 2022.

[38] Kathleen A Burke, Abigail M Janke, Christy L Rhine, and Nicolas L Fawzi. Residue-by-

residue view of in vitro fus granules that bind the c-terminal domain of rna polymerase

ii. Molecular cell, 60(2):231–241, 2015.

27

[39] Pablo G Debenedetti. Metastable liquids: concepts and principles. 1996.

[40] Tadao Sugimoto. General kinetics of ostwald ripening of precipitates. Journal of Colloid

and Interface Science, 63(1):16–26, 1978.

[41] Ilya M Lifshitz and Vitaly V Slyozov. The kinetics of precipitation from supersaturated

solid solutions. Journal of physics and chemistry of solids, 19(1-2):35–50, 1961.

[42] Carl Wagner. Theorie der alterung von niederschl¨agen durch uml¨osen (ostwald-reifung).

Zeitschrift f¨ur Elektrochemie, Berichte der Bunsengesellschaft f¨ur physikalische Chemie,

65(7-8):581–591, 1961.

[43] Leonidas Emmanouilidis, Ettore Bartalucci, Yelena Kan, Mahdiye Ijavi, Maria Es-

cura P´erez, Pavel Afanasyev, Daniel Boehringer, Johannes Zehnder, Sapun H. Parekh,

Mischa Bonn, Thomas C. T. Michaels, Thomas Wiegand, and Fr´ed´eric H.-T. Allain. A

solid beta-sheet structure is formed at the surface of fus droplets during aging. Nature

Chemical Biology, pages 1–9, 2024.

[44] C Blake Wilson, Myungwoon Lee, Wai-Ming Yau, and Robert Tycko. Conformations

of a low-complexity protein in homogeneous and phase-separated frozen solutions. Bio-

physical journal, 123(23):4097–4114, 2024.

[45] Anastasia C Murthy, Gregory L Dignon, Yelena Kan, G¨ul H Zerze, Sapun H Parekh,

Jeetain Mittal, and Nicolas L Fawzi. Molecular interactions underlying liquid- liquid

phase separation of the fus low-complexity domain. Nature structural & molecular

biology, 26(7):637–648, 2019.

[46] Laura Esteban-Hofer, Leonidas Emmanouilidis, Maxim Yulikov, Fr´ed´eric H-T Allain,

and Gunnar Jeschke. Ensemble structure of the n-terminal domain (1–267) of fus in a

biomolecular condensate. Biophysical Journal, 123(5):538–554, 2024.

[47] Ashish Joshi, Anuja Walimbe, Anamika Avni, Sandeep K Rai, Lisha Arora, Snehasis

Sarkar, and Samrat Mukhopadhyay. Single-molecule fret unmasks structural subpopula-

tions and crucial molecular events during fus low-complexity domain phase separation.

Nature Communications, 14(1):7331, 2023.

28

[48] Frank H Stillinger and Thomas A Weber. Packing structures and transitions in liquids

and solids. Science, 225(4666):983–989, 1984.

[49] Patrick M McCall, Kyoohyun Kim, Anatol W Fritsch, JM Iglesias-Artola, LM Jawerth,

Jie Wang, Martine Ruer, J Peychl, Andrey Poznyakovskiy, Jochen Guck, et al. Quan-

titative phase microscopy enables precise and efficient determination of biomolecular

condensate composition. BioRxiv, pages 2020–10, 2020.

[50] Daria Maltseva, Sayantan Chatterjee, Chun-Chieh Yu, Mateusz Brzezinski, Yuki Na-

gata, Grazia Gonella, Anastasia C Murthy, Jeanne C Stachowiak, Nicolas L Fawzi,

Sapun H Parekh, et al. Fibril formation and ordering of disordered fus lc driven by

hydrophobic interactions. Nature chemistry, 15(8):1146–1154, 2023.

[51] Alicja W Wojciechowska, Jakub W Wojciechowski, and Malgorzata Kotulska. Non-

standard proteins in the lenses of alphafold3-case study of amyloids. bioRxiv, pages

2024–07, 2024.

[52] Sean M Law, Aaron T Frank, and Charles L Brooks III. Pcasso: A fast and efficient

cα-based method for accurately assigning protein secondary structure elements. Journal

of computational chemistry, 35(24):1757–1761, 2014.

[53] Mai Suan Li, DK Klimov, JE Straub, and D Thirumalai. Probing the mechanisms of

fibril formation using lattice models. The Journal of chemical physics, 129(17), 2008.

[54] Emilie Bertrand, Cl´ement Demongin, Ioana Dobra, Juan Carlos Rengifo-Gonzalez,

Anastasia S Singatulina, Maria V Sukhanova, Olga I Lavrik, David Pastr´e, and Loic

Hamon. Fus fibrillation occurs through a nucleation-based process below the critical

concentration required for liquid–liquid phase separation. Scientific Reports, 13(1):7772,

2023.

[55] Maria Oranges, Chandrima Jash, Gonen Golani, Manas Seal, Sidney R Cohen, Irit

Rosenhek-Goldian, Alexey Bogdanov, Samuel Safran, and Daniella Goldfarb. Core-

shell model of the clusters of cpeb4 isoforms preceding liquid-liquid phase separation.

Biophysical Journal, 123(16):2604–2622, 2024.

29

[56] Peleg Ragonis-Bachar, Gabriel Axel, Shahar Blau, Nir Ben-Tal, Rachel Kolodny, and

Meytal Landau. What can alphafold do for antimicrobial amyloids? Proteins: Structure,

Function, and Bioinformatics, 92(2):265–281, 2024.

[57] Devlina Chakravarty, Joseph W Schafer, Ethan A Chen, Joseph F Thole, Leslie A Ro-

nish, Myeongsang Lee, and Lauren L Porter. Alphafold predictions of fold-switched con-

formations are driven by structure memorization. Nature communications, 15(1):7296,

2024.

[58] Philipp Neudecker, Paul Robustelli, Andrea Cavalli, Patrick Walsh, Patrik Lundstr¨om,

Arash Zarrine-Afsar, Simon Sharpe, Michele Vendruscolo, and Lewis E Kay. Structure

of an intermediate state in protein folding and aggregation. Science, 336(6079):362–366,

2012.

[59] Aviad Levin, Thomas O Mason, Lihi Adler-Abramovich, Alexander K Buell, George

Meisl, Celine Galvagnion, Yaron Bram, Samuel A Stratford, Christopher M Dobson,

Tuomas PJ Knowles, and E Gazit. Ostwald’s rule of stages governs structural transi-

tions and morphology of dipeptide supramolecular polymers. Nature communications,

5(1):5219, 2014.

[60] Debayan Chakraborty, John E Straub, and D Thirumalai. Energy landscapes of aβ

monomers are sculpted in accordance with ostwald’s rule of stages. Science Advances,

9(12):eadd6921, 2023.

[61] Alberto Ceccon, Vitali Tugarinov, Francesco Torricella, and G Marius Clore. Quanti-

tative nmr analysis of the kinetics of prenucleation oligomerization and aggregation of

pathogenic huntingtin exon-1 protein. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,

119(29):e2207690119, 2022.

[62] Jaekyun Jeon, Wai-Ming Yau, and Robert Tycko. Early events in amyloid-β self-

assembly probed by time-resolved solid state nmr and light scattering. Nature com-

munications, 14(1):2964, 2023.

30

[63] Blake D Fonda, Khaled M Jami, Natalie R Boulos, and Dylan T Murray. Identification of

the rigid core for aged liquid droplets of an rna-binding protein low complexity domain.

Journal of the American Chemical Society, 143(17):6657–6668, 2021.

[64] Khaled M Jami, Daniel C Farb, Kayla M Osumi, Catelynn C Shafer, Sophie Criscione,

and Dylan T Murray. Small heat shock protein hspb8 interacts with a pre-fibrillar tdp43

low complexity domain species to delay fibril formation. bioRxiv, pages 2025–01, 2025.

[65] Guang Shi, Lei Liu, Changbong Hyeon, and Dave Thirumalai. Interphase human chro-

mosome exhibits out of equilibrium glassy dynamics. Nature communications, 9(1):3161,

2018.

[66] Thomas Veitshans, Dmitri Klimov, and Devarajan Thirumalai. Protein folding kinetics:

timescales, pathways and energy landscapes in terms of sequence-dependent properties.

Folding and Design, 2(1):1–22, 1997.

[67] Guang Shi, Sucheol Shin, and D Thirumalai. Static three-dimensional structures deter-

mine fast dynamics between distal loci pairs in interphase chromosomes. bioRxiv, pages

2025–01, 2025.

[68] M Faris Muslim Al-Athari. Estimation of the mean of truncated exponential distribu-

tion. Journal of Mathematics and Statistics, 4(4):284, 2008.

[69] Leandro Martınez, Ricardo Andrade, Ernesto G Birgin, and Jos´e Mario Martınez. Pack-

mol: A package for building initial configurations for molecular dynamics simulations.

J. Comput. Chem, 30(13):2157–2164, 2009.

[70] Peter Eastman, Jason Swails, John D Chodera, Robert T McGibbon, Yutong Zhao,

Kyle A Beauchamp, Lee-Ping Wang, Andrew C Simmonett, Matthew P Harrigan,

Chaya D Stern, et al. Openmm 7: Rapid development of high performance algorithms

for molecular dynamics. PLoS computational biology, 13(7):e1005659, 2017.

[71] Milot Mirdita, Konstantin Sch¨utze, Yoshitaka Moriwaki, Lim Heo, Sergey Ovchinnikov,

and Martin Steinegger. Colabfold: making protein folding accessible to all. Nature

methods, 19(6):679–682, 2022.

31

[72] Yang Zhang and Jeffrey Skolnick. Scoring function for automated assessment of pro-

tein structure template quality. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics,

57(4):702–710, 2004.

[73] Shawn T Brown, Paola Buitrago, Edward Hanna, Sergiu Sanielevici, Robin Scibek, and

Nicholas A Nystrom. Bridges-2: A platform for rapidly-evolving and data intensive

research. In Practice and Experience in Advanced Research Computing 2021: Evolution

Across All Dimensions, pages 1–4. 2021.

32

Figure 1: Ostwald’s rule of stages: (A) The FUS-LC sequence using a one-letter code for the amino acids. Core-1 residues 39-95 are in red, core-2 residues are highlighted in purple, and those forming core-3 are in green. Panels B-D: Distributions of first-passage times (FPTs) for the transition from the disordered ground state to the fibril-like N ∗ states in FUS- LC (residues 1–214). Shown are the τF P T distributions sampled from Brownian dynamics simulations (see Methods) for the transition from the free energy ground state of FUS-LC to the core-1 fibril-like structure (panel B), to the core-2 fibril-like structure (panel C), and to the core-3 S-bend and U-bend (inset) fibril-like structures (panel D) predicted by AF3. Panels E-G: Distributions of logarithm of first passage times (FPTs) ln[τF P T ] for the transition from the disordered ground state to the fibril-like N ∗ states. (H) Theoretical distributions of FPTs calculated using the correction formula (see Eq. 2). (I): MFPTs as a function of relative stability with respect to core-3 (S-bend) for FUS-LC. The inset shows the experimental structures of core-1 (PDB ID: 5W3N [20]) and core-2 (PDB ID: 6XFM [23]), along with the predicted S-bend structure of core-3. (J) MFPTs as a function of relative stability with respect to core-2 for FUS-LC-N (residues 1–163). The distributions of ln[τF P T ] for the transition from the disordered ground state to the fibril-like N ∗ states for FUS-LC-N 33 are show in Fig. S2.

34

Figure 2: Phase separation in FUS-LC. (A) Representative snapshots illustrating the progression of phase separation in a system of 200 FUS-LC chains. The first panel shows the initial homogeneous configuration in the single dilute phase. Subsequent panels depict the emergence of small oligomeric nuclei, followed by their growth into a larger oligomer. This structure eventually matures into a droplet, representing the equilibrium state characterized by the coexistence of condensed and dilute phases. FUS-LC proteins in the monomeric state are rendered in transparent gray. (B) The temporal progression of individual FUS protein molecules is shown as a sequence of discrete states over the course of the simulation τ is a simulation time step, which is defined in Methods. Conformational states of the proteins are represented through a color-coded scheme. Two independent trajectories are displayed. (C) Temporal evolution of the sizes of the three largest droplets (blue, red, and green) corresponding to the trajectories in panel B. Droplet size is defined as the number of FUS- LC chains contained within each droplet. (D) Protein mass concentration c as a function of simulation time for the droplets shown in panel C.

35

36

Figure 3: Equilibrium characteristics of FUS-LC condensates. (A) Small-angle X- ray scattering (SAXS) profiles for FUS-LC polymers in the condensed phase (within the phase separated droplets) and the dilute phase (outside droplets). The scattering intensity I(q) as a function of the scattering vector q. The inset presents representative images from a simulation of 200 FUS-LC chains, illustrating the coexistence of dilute and condensed phases. (B) Distributions of the chemical potential in the dispersed and condensed phases, scaled by the average chemical potential in the condensed phase, ⟨µc⟩. (C) Distributions of the chemical potential difference between condensed and dilute phases, defined as ∆µ = ⟨µc⟩ − ⟨µd⟩, scaled by ⟨µc⟩ for assemblies consisting of different numbers of chains, where ⟨µc⟩ and ⟨µd⟩ denote the average chemical potentials in the condensed and dilute phases, respectively. (D) Ensemble-averaged residue-wise percentages of β-strand content for FUS-LC monomers in homogeneous and phase-separated environments. Vertical dashed lines are positioned at the residues corresponding boundaries of the core regions: core-1 (residues 39-95), core-2 (residues 112-150), and core-3 (residues 155-190). (E) Amino acid dependent propensity for β-strand formation calculated from the inherent structure of droplet. The propensity values are averaged over all the chains in the condensate. (F) Cumulative probability for each residue of FUS-LC to form inter-chain contacts within the condensate. For a given residue i, Pi is obtained by summing the average probabilities of all its intermolecular contacts with residues j (see panel I). (G) Droplet size distributions in the condensed and dilute phases. (H) Distributions of protein concentration in the condensed and dilute phases. (I) Intermolecular contact probability pij between residues i and j, calculated over the equilibrium portion of the trajectory (t > 3 × 109τ ).

Figure 4: Conformations of monomers in dilute and dense phase are similar. Dis- tance distributions between select residues (base on an experimental study [46]) within the same FUS-LC chain for chains in the dilute phase and those within the condensed droplet from simulations. These distributions are compared to experimental distance distributions for FUS1-267, extracted from Fig. 2 in Ref. [46]. The corresponding mean distances and stan- dard deviations are provided in Table S4.

38

Figure 5: Structural models of core-1 and core-3 fibrils predicted by AlphaFold3. (A) Structure of core-1 (residues 39–95) resolved by solid-state NMR [20]. Tyrosine (TYR) side chains are shown as sticks, with β-sheets colored brown and turn/coil regions in gray. (B, C) AlphaFold3 predictions for pentameric assembly of FUS1-110 (B) and tetrameric assembly of FUS141-214 (C). The color scheme is the same as in panel (A). Core-1 residues (39–95) in (B) and core-3 residues (155–190) in (C) are depicted as in panel (A), while the remaining fibril regions are rendered transparent for clarity.

39