# Abstract

Alzheimer’s disease is characterized by dangerous amyloid plaques formed by de- posits of the protein β-Amyloid aggre- gates in the brain. The specific amino acid sequence that is responsible for the aggregates of β-Amyloid is lys-leu-val- phe-phe (KLVFF). KLVFF aggregation inhibitors, which we design in this paper, prevent KLVFF from binding with itself to form oligomers or fibrils (and eventu- ally plaques) that cause neuronal death. Our binder-blocker peptides are designed such that, on one side, they bind strongly to KLVFF, and on the other side, they disrupt critical interactions, thus prevent- ing aggregation. Our methods use opti- mization techniques and molecular sim- ulations and identify 10 candidate se- quences for trial of the 3.2 million pos- sible sequences. This approach for in- hibitor identification can be generalized to other diseases characterized by protein aggregation, such as Parkinson’s, Hunt- ington’s, and prion diseases.

1

# Introduction

This manuscript was originally written in November 2014 and is being uploaded for archival purposes. Please note that this version reflects the state of the field as of November 2014, and it has not been up- dated to incorporate newer results or methods pub- lished since then.

Dementia is a neurodegenerative disease that cur- rently affects more than 44 million people globally, a number that is projected to triple by 2050 [Gaugler et al., 2014]. The most common occurrence of de- mentia is Alzheimer’s Disease (60-80% of cases). Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is a slowly progressive disease, which suggests, in many cases, that the current treatments come too late and are ineffective [Prince et al., 2014].

Protein aggregation plays a central role in the progress of AD [Het´enyi et al., 2002]. One key pathogen of AD is a buildup, or aggregation, of β- Amyloid plaques in the brain. During the aggre- gation process, β-Amyloid bind with with other β- Amyloid. As aggregation progresses from dimers, to soluble oligomers that bind to nerver cell re- cepters and can lead to neuronal death, or plaques. Targeting the beta-amyloid aggregation process at its initiation is more promising than targeting the aggregates, as there is no definitive kinetic pathway for AD aggregation [Gaugler et al., 2014]. The specific self-aggregating sequence of amino acid residues responsible for the joining, or aggregation process, is lys-leu-val-phe-phe (KLVFF) [Sciarretta et al., 2006]. Preventing these sequences from ag- gregating is promising in preventing amyloid patho- genesis and fibrillogenesis [Prince et al., 2014], sup- porting that they could be useful at different stages of the disease. Additionally:

1. Peptide inhibitors can be readily modified for chemical stability [Sciarretta et al., 2006]. 2. Peptide-based drugs generally have higher specificity and fewer side effects [Otvos and Wade, 2014]

3. Peptide-based drugs are small enough to trans-













port easily through the human body.

These properties give peptide inhibitors an ad- vantage over other compound or element-based in- hibitors. Still, designing an appropriate peptide in- hibitor must satisfy several constraints:

1. High fold specificity, or the ability of the pep-

tide to fold into a given structure

2. Favorable binding energy, which shows how

well the peptide binds to KLVFF

3. Satisfaction of natural constraints- interacting

beneficially with the human body

With 20 natural amino acids, a 5-residue peptide sequence (e.g., KLVFF) can be formed in 3.2 mil- lion (20ˆ5) ways. This research identifies candidate amino acid residue sequences that meet literature- based constraints to provide optimal candidates for creating peptide inhibitors with stable interactions at the molecular level. In the past, the discovery of these inhibitors was described as “often fortuitous rather than rational”[Sciarretta et al., 2006]. How- ever, in this research, inhibitory peptides are iden- tified systematically through computational protein design, which involves combinatorial optimization, molecular modeling, and virtual screening.

Specifically, combinatorial optimization methods are used to obtain optimal solutions in the face of an excessive number of possible solutions and strict constraints, like finding optimal inhibitors of β-Amyloid from 3.2 million possibilities [Diwekar, 2003]. The objective of the optimization here is to find inhibitory peptide sequences that maximize fold specificity, minimize binding energy and fit natural biological constraints. To do so, the candi- date solutions from the optimization stage are sub- jected to all-atom molecular dynamics simulations to find a predictive estimate of the candidate in- hibitor’s binding affinity to inhibit the key interac- tions involved in AD amyloidogenesis.

This procedure can be used for other neurodegen- erative and aggregation based diseases, like Type II Diabetes and prion diseases, with flexible/weak NMR templates that could not be previously evalu- ated.

1.1 Developing a Model : A structural trajectory model for a 40-Residue β- Amyloid Fibril with Two-Fold Symmetry, Positive Stagger (PDB 2LMN where 2LMN is the Protein

Data Bank code of this structure), consists of 10 NMR-derived states that show how β-Amyloid pro- teins interact with other β-Amyloid proteins flexibly [Petkova et al., 2006]. This base model takes into account key secondary and tertiary structures. As in AD progression, the KLVFF sequence in this model self-aggregates by finding other KLVFF sequences in different β-Amyloid proteins to form a plaque. An inhibitory sequence that binds to KLVFF on one end and disrupts binding on the other end would prevent β-Amyloid proteins from self-aggregating.

Figure 1: Edited model for Chain C with Chain C high- lighted in red (visualization using PyMol).

In each of the 10 NMR derived states, there are 12 different chains labeled A through L. One chain is equivalent to one β-Amyloid protein. For every NMR-derived state, the KLVFF sequence is isolated in chain C, allowing new sequences to be based on the KLVFF backbone. The isolated sequence was blocked with neutral compounds (ACE and NHE) to prevent spurious end-effects. As seen in Figure 1, the model contains the isolated KLVFF sequence in Chain C, while all the other chains remain intact. This modified model shows that the KLVFF se- quence from chain C aggregates with the KLVFF occurrences in the adjacent chains (B and D).

1.2 Optimization Overview : Figure 2 shows how the top 20 sequences were determined from the 3.2 million sequences using the integrated computational framework developed in this study using Python.

Two thousand candidate sequences remained af- ter using mutational and biological constraints in

Figure 2: Python integration framework for modeling and simulation.

Protein WISDOM [Smadbeck et al., 2013]. Protein WISDOM uses a combinatorial global optimization method, the branch and bound technique, to solve the optimization problem defined in Equation Set 1.

n(cid:88)

mi(cid:88)

n(cid:88)

mk(cid:88)

bm(cid:88)

i=1

j=1

k=i+1

l=1

d:disbin(xi,xkd)

ik(xi, xk)bikdw jl E jl

ik

min y j i ,yl k

subject to

mi(cid:88)

j=1 mi(cid:88)

j=1 mk(cid:88)

l=1 mk(cid:88)

l=1

y j i

= 1 ∀i

w jl ik

= yl

k ∀i, k > i, l

w jl ik

= y j

i ∀i, k > i, j

w jl ik

= y j

i ∀i, k > i, j

bm(cid:88)

bikd = 1 ∀i, k > i

d:disbin(xi,xkd) k, w jl y j i , yl

ik, bikd ∈ {0, 1} ∀i, j, k > i, l, d

Equation set 1

The first line of Equation Set 1 defines the objec- tive function in terms of potential energy, and the rest of the equation provides structural constraints in terms of integer variables. The final design used the high Resolution Centroid-Centroid 8 Bin Potential for the Distance-Dependent Force Field. It sums po- tential energies based on distances between the cen- troids of each amino acid [Smadbeck et al., 2013] used in the objective function, making it a mixed integer programming problem.

Selected sequences are then run through a fold specificity stage and a binding affinity stage. Fold specificity is a measure of how well the designed sequence adopts the template fold. Equation set 2 defines fold specificity calculated from Boltzmann distributions related to conformers experienced.

fspec =

(cid:80) (cid:80)

i∈novel e−βEi i∈native e−βEi

Equation set 2 Approximate binding affinity, a measure of how well the designed sequence binds to a given protein target, is shown in equation set 3.

K∗ = qPL qPqL

qPL =

(cid:88)

b∈B

e− Eb

RT , qP =

(cid:88)

f ∈F

e−

E f RT , qPL =

e− El

RT

(cid:88)

l∈L

Equation set 3

Equation sets listed are from the Smadbeck et al. paper [Smadbeck et al., 2013]. These steps resulted in the two thousand output sequences

Then, four sets of unique constraints were in- putted and run through the Protein WISDOM web server. Each run, detailed by the rules in Table 1, varied in mutation sets and biological constraints. These were based on the properties of KLVFF that were consistent across multiple papers and previ- ous sequences that were compatible in human bod- ies [Het´enyi et al., 2002; Sciarretta et al., 2006; Kokkoni et al., 2006; Chakrabarti et al., 2010; H¨ard and Lendel, 2012; Hughes et al., 2000; LeVine, 2007; Mason et al., 2003; Schwarzman et al., 2005; Soto et al., 1996, 2007; Watanabe et al., 2002].

Each of the 4 runs produced 500 sequences that met these constraints. Of the resulting unique se- quences, sequences that had poor potential energies

Inputs: Modified 2LMN structure from Base Model, Mutation Sets, Biological Constraints Rule 4: Rule 1:

Rule 3:

Rule 2:

• Free first residue • Overall +1 charge

• Free first residue • Overall charge

neutral

• Charged

first residue at neutral pH positive / basic • First position only K or R (not H) • Other residues con- strained by SASA

Blocked at the N-terminus

• Charged

first residue at neutral pH negative / acidic • First position only D or E (not C) • Other residues con- strained by SASA

Blocked the C- at terminus with an Acetyl to reduce the number of hydrogen bonds with water.

Table 1: The four different runs with constraints detailed based on: [Het´enyi et al., 2002; Sciarretta et al., 2006; Kokkoni et al., 2006; Chakrabarti et al., 2010; H¨ard and Lendel, 2012; Hughes et al., 2000; LeVine, 2007; Mason et al., 2003; Schwarzman et al., 2005; Soto et al., 1996, 2007; Watanabe et al., 2002].

or were known to self-aggregate were eliminated. Additionally, patterns observed in sequences that previously failed from prior literature were used to narrow down from the 2000 sequences to 687 se- quences.

1

Then, initial models of each modified peptide chain were created through using the SCWRL ro- tamer library [Wang et al., 2008], assuming a com- mon initial backbone, as seen in Figure 3 2.

The next step in finding candidate inhibitors is to run molecular dynamics simulations on these top 687 sequences. Molecular Dynamics (MD) is a simulation technique that determines the trajecto- ries and interactions of atoms by solving for New- ton’s motion equations after atoms are allowed to interact at each instant in time, as defined by force fields [Cuendet, 2008]. This method uses the AM- BER (Assisted Model Building with Energy Refine-

1It should be noted that the isolated KLVFF sequence (from Chain C), which is being modified to create pep- tides, is a ligand. The receptor refers to all parts of the trajectory except the ligand. The complex is the ligand plus the receptor.

2This assumption can be overcome during the simula-

tions if necessary.

Figure 3: PyMol visualiztion using a sample of random sequences overlayed so that the side chains a revisible (left), but all of the sequences have the same backbone (right)

ment) software for molecular dynamic simulations and was used to obtain estimates of the binding en- ergy of these 687 sequences [Case et al., 2014].

Each ligand was then determined, run through simulation, and evaluated in each complex. Because each ligand changes, new protein files for each mod- ified C chain were created. Then, initial topol- ogy files were generated by using the force field 03 model (ff03), which dampens charges on the protein so that the charges are realistic in situ rather than de- rived from the gas phase [Khoury et al., 2013]. This

was followed by Molecular Dynamics simulations, which utilize optimization to perform minimization, heating, and equilibration of the protein. Finally, the binding energies for these remaining sequences were ranked and evaluated.

2 Results and Discussion

Figure 4 presents the distribution of binding energy for all the 687 sequences, with the red mark repre- senting the binding energy of the KLVFF sequence itself.

Out of the 687 sequences that were run through AMBER simulation, only a handful had very low Binding Energies. As more experimental research is pursued, it is important to consider all sequences with binding energies statistically significantly bet- ter than KLVFF as open options (see Figure 5). With current literature, sequences with energies be- tween the -60 and -80 range kcal/mol are ideal and would be the most potent.

Top ranked sequences included frequent occur- rences of Tryptophans (W) in the results. Trypto- phan has very favorable binding energy due to its ability to form large non-polar interactions, but it usually has poor fold specificity. This means that it may not be viable in the human body due to be- ing too “sticky” [Branden and Tooze, 1999]. Thus, sequences with more than three W’s in a row were eliminated.

Ultimately, 10 sequences were identified and compared with the native binding energy of KLVFF, which was -40 kcal/mol. The δ binding energy is simply the binding energy of the sequence – bind- ing of the native (KLVFF).

Figure 4: Binding energy and δ Binding energy for all 687 sequences.

Figure 5: Bar Graph comparing Sequences (ranked by Binding Energy in kcal/mol) to native (binding energy of KLVFF to itself) with error bars

Figure 5 presents these top ten sequences with their binding energies. The figure also shows the error bars related to each sequence. In this image, it can be seen sequence with the best binding free energy is the most promising sequence because of the high binding strength relative to KLVFF.

3 Conclusion

This research creates a procedure and an integrated framework to screen candidate inhibitors designed through an advanced combinatorial optimization engine for flexible templates, and identified promis- ing candidate sequences for peptide inhibitors of β- Amyloid.

First, this work established a novel procedure and integrated framework for a flexible template which can be applied in finding inhibitor sequences for other neurodegenerative diseases and in binding ap- plications in bio-material engineering.

Second, 10 optimal candidates of peptide in- hibitors for Alzheimer’s were identified. These se- quences are candidates for further experiments.

This procedure is consistent with all the met- fold specificity, bind- rics initially established: ing energy, and possibility of positive human in- teraction. Some sequences identified systemati- cally demonstrated previously established desirable physical properties, such as the presence of alternat- ing polar and non-polar amino acids, and the other sequences have not yet been tested. In fact, in the Kokkoni et al. paper, there was one sequence that matched the sequences generated within this study [Kokkoni et al., 2006], which shows that this proce- dure independently found a candidate sequence that had previously been successful in inhibiting amy-

loid formation.

Experimental considerations and possible im- provement strategies include investigating bioavail- ability, systematically filtering sequences that self- aggregate, studying peptide access to the desired site of action, the D chirality of these sequences to increase half-life and metabolic stability, and the N-methylation in the 5th position [Kokkoni et al., 2006; H¨ard and Lendel, 2012].

References C Branden and J Tooze.

Introduction to pro- tein structure. Garland Publishing, Union West Square, New York, 2 edition, 1999.

D A Case, V Babin, J T Berryman, R M Betz, Q Cai, D S Cerutti, T E III Cheatham, T A Darden, R E Duke, H Gohlke, A W Goetz, S Gusarov, N Homeyer, P Janowski, J Kaus, I Kolossv´ary, A Kovalenko, T S Lee, S LeGrand, T Luchko, R Luo, B Madej, K M Merz, F Paesani, D R Roe, A Roitberg, C Sagui, R Salomon-Ferrer, G Seabra, C L Simmerling, W Smith, J Swails, R C Walker, J Wang, R M Wolf, X Wu, and P A Kollman. AMBER 14. University of California, San Francisco, 2014.

E Chakrabarti, S Ghosh, S Sadhukhan, L Sayre, G Tochtrop, and J Smith. Synthesis and biologi- cal evaluation of analogues of a novel inhibitor of β-amyloid secretion. J. Med. Chem, 53(14):5302, 2010.

M Cuendet. Molecular dynamics simulation; a short

introduction, 2008.

U Diwekar. Chapter four: Discrete optimization. In Introduction to applied optimization, pages 89– 114, 123–125,134,182. Kluwer Academic Pub- lishers, Norwell, Massachusetts, 2003. Discrete Optimization problems involve discrete decision variables.

J Gaugler, B James, T Johnson, K Scholz, and J Weuve. 2014 alzheimer’s disease facts and fig- ures. Alzheimer’s & Dementia, 10(2):September 22,2014, 2014.

C Het´enyi, Z Szab´o, E Klement, Z Datki, T K¨ortv´elyesi, M Zar´adani, and et al. Pentapep- tide amides interfere with the aggregation of b- amyloid peptide of alzheimer’s disease. Bio- chemical and Biophysical Research Communica- tions, 292:931–936, 2002.

E Hughes, R Burke, and A Doig. Inhibition of toxi- city in the b-amyloid peptide fragment b-(25-35) using n-methylated derivatives: A general strat- egy to prevent amyloid formation. Journal of Bi- ological Chemistry, 275:25109, 2000.

T H¨ard and C Lendel.

Inhibition of amyloid for- mation. Journal of Molecular Biology, 421:441, 2012.

G Khoury, J Thompson, J Smadbeck, C Kies- lich, and C Floudas. Forcefield ptm: Ab ini- tio charge and amber forcefield parameters for frequently occurring post-translational modifica- tions. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computa- tion, 9(12):5653–5674, 2013. Retrieved August 28, 2014, from http://pubs.acs.org/.

N Kokkoni, K Stott, H Amijee, J M Mason, and A J Doig. N-methylated peptide inhibitors of β-amyloid aggregation and toxicity. optimiza- tion of the inhibitor structure. Biochemistry, 45(32):9906, 2006.

H LeVine. Small molecule inhibitors of a-beta as- sembly. Amyloid : The International Journal of Experimental and Clinical Investigation : The Official Journal of the International Society of Amyloidosis, 14(3):185, 2007.

J Mason, N Kokkoni, K Stott, and A Doig. Design strategies for anti-amyloid agents. Current Opin- ion Structural Biology, 13(4):526, 2003.

L Otvos and J D Wade. Current challenges in peptide-based drug discovery. Frontiers in Chem- istry, 2:August 8, 2014.

A Petkova, W Yau, and R Tycko. Structural model for a 40-residue beta-amyloid fibril with two-fold symmetry, positive stagger. protein data bank: Experimental constraints on quaternary structure in alzheimer’s beta-amyloid fibrils., 2006. M Prince, E Alabanese, M Guerchet,

and M Prina. World Alzheimer’s Report 2014 (Up- date. Alzheimer’s Disease International, London, 2014.

A Schwarzman, M Tsiper, Gregori L, D Goldgaber, D, J Frakowiak, B Mazur-Kolecka, A Taraskina, and et al. Selection of peptides binding to the amyloid b-protein reveals potential inhibitors of amyloid formation. Amyloid : The International Journal of Experimental and Clinical Investiga- tion : The Official Journal of the International Society of Amyloidosis, 12(4):199, 2005.

K L Sciarretta, D J Gordon, and S C Meredith. Peptide-based inhibitors of amyloid assembly. In Methods in Enzymology, volume 413, page 273. 2006.

J Smadbeck, M B Peterson, G A Khoury, M S Taylor, and C A Floudas. Protein wisdom: A workbench for in silico de novo design of Jove, 77:September 27, 2014, biomolecules. 2013.

C Soto, M Kindy, M Baumann, and B Frangione. Inhibition of alzheimer’s amyloidosis by peptides that prevent beta-sheet conformation. Biochemi- cal and Biophysical Research Communications, 226(3):672, 1996.

P Soto, M Griffin, and J Shea. New insights into the mechanism of alzheimer amyloid-b fibrillogiene- sis inhibiton by n-methylated peptides. Biophys- ical Journal, 93:3015, 2007.

Q Wang, A Canutescu, and R Dunbrack. Scwrl and molide: Computer programs for side-chain conformation prediction and homology model- ing. Nature Protocols, 3:September 28, 2008. K Watanabe, K Nakamura, S Akikusa, T Okada, M Kodaka, T Konakahara, and et al. Inhibitors of fibril formation and cytotoxicity of beta-amyloid peptide composed of klvff recognition element and flexible hydrophilic disrupting element. In- hibitors of Fibril Formation and Cytotoxicity of Beta-Amyloid Peptide Composed of KLVFF Recognition Element and Flexible Hydrophilic Disrupting Element., 290(1):121, 2002.