# Abstract

There is currently a growing interest in understanding the origins of intrinsic fluores-

cence as a way to design non-invasive probes for biophysical processes. In this regard,

understanding how pH influences fluorescence in non-aromatic biomolecular assemblies

is key to controlling their optical properties in realistic cellular conditions. Here, we

combine experiments and theory to investigate the pH-dependent emission of solid-

state L-Lysine (Lys). Lys aggregates prepared at different pH values using HCl and

H2SO4 exhibit protonation- and counterion-dependent morphology and fluorescence, as

1













shown by microscopy and steady-state measurements. We find an enhancement in the

fluorescence moving from acidic to basic conditions. To uncover the molecular origin of

these trends, we performed non-adiabatic molecular dynamics simulations on three Lys

crystal models representing distinct protonation states. Our simulations indicate that

enhanced protonation under acidic conditions facilitates non-radiative decay via proton

transfer, whereas basic conditions favor radiative decay. These findings highlight pH

as a key factor tuning fluorescence in Lys assemblies, offering insights for designing pH

responsive optical materials based on non-aromatic amino acids.

Fluorescence in biological materials is typically attributed to aromatic amino acids due

to their conjugated π-systems and favorable photophysical properties. 1 However, recent find-

ings have revealed intrinsic photoluminescence in non-aromatic amino acids and peptides,

particularly under aggregation in solution or in the solid state. 2–8 A key mechanism proposed

to underlie this phenomenon is aggregation-induced emission (AIE), 9 wherein non-emissive

species in dilute solution become strongly emissive upon aggregation. While AIE is well

established in synthetic organic luminogens, 10–12 its manifestation in non-aromatic biomolec-

ular assemblies, such as peptide and amino acid aggregates, has opened new directions for

exploring photophysics in biologically relevant systems. 13–16

Hydrogen bonding plays a central role in mediating luminescence in non-aromatic sys-

tems, influencing both the extent of electron delocalization and which vibrational modes

lead to non-radiative decay on the excited state. 2,6,17,18 Environmental factors such as pH,

solvent polarity, and ionic strength can profoundly affect these interactions, often altering

morphology and photophysical properties. 19,20 However, how these factors reshape the ex-

cited state (ES) potential energy landscape remains unclear. 21 While peptide self-assembly

under neutral pH has been extensively studied, 22–24 less attention has been given to ex-

treme pH conditions, which can drastically alter conformation, charge distribution, and

intermolecular interactions. 21,25 In this regard, pH is known to play an important role in

tuning fluorescence in aromatic or more generally conjugated molecular systems. 26–29 Thus,

2

the potential of designing novel probes based on intrinsic fluorescence as indicators of pH

in optical sensing and imaging, could open up new applications in biological and material

sciences. 29,30

In this context, L-Lysine (Lys), a non-aromatic amino acid with a protonatable side chain,

provides a compelling model to probe pH-dependent luminescence. Depending on pH, Lys

adopts distinct protonation states (see Fig. 1), 31 which in turn strongly influence its self-

assembly and crystal packing, thereby modulating its photophysical properties. 4,32 Similar

effects have been observed in poly-lysine systems, where pH influences aggregate morphology

and optical response. 33–35 Recent work by Stagi et al. 32 combined experiments and theory

to investigate the photophysical properties of self-assembled Lys in aqueous solution. Ab-

sorption spectra showed a distinct band at 278 nm, attributed to electronic transitions in

hydrogen bonded Lys clusters. Classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations further con-

firmed that Lys forms clusters of varied size through hydrogen bonds (HBs) and hydrophobic

interactions, with the former playing a dominant role. Fluorescence measurements in solu-

tion exhibit strong pH dependence: emission is enhanced under neutral and basic conditions

but quenched at low pH, where high protonation is proposed to inhibit functional group

interactions, reducing emission efficiency. 32 However, the precise ES relaxation pathways

that affect fluorescence emission in titratable amino acids, such as lysine, remains poorly

understood.

In this contribution, by combining both experiments and theory, we address a critical

gap in our understanding of how pH affects non-aromatic fluorescence using solid-state ly-

sine as a model system. Solid-state Lys aggregates were prepared at four pH values (1,

4, 7, and 10) to probe how the protonation influences both morphological and photolumi-

nescence properties. Since pH was adjusted with either a monoprotic (HCl) or a diprotic

(H2SO4) acid, we also assessed the impact of the counterion on these properties. Morphology

was characterized by optical and scanning electron microscopy (SEM), while photolumines-

cence was studied via confocal microscopy, steady-state fluorescence, and external quantum

3

Figure 1: Mole fractions of the four protonation states of L-lysine as a function of pH. The fully protonated cationic species (Lys2+) and fully deprotonated anionic species (Lys−) each reach near-complete population under highly acidic or basic conditions, respectively. The zwitterionic form (Lys0) peaks at approximately 75% near the isoelectric point (pH 9.74), reflecting the similar pKa values of the α- and ε-amino groups.

efficiency (EQE) measurements. Our results show that both protonation state and the se-

lected acid significantly influence aggregate morphology and fluorescence, establishing these

as key parameters for tuning optical properties. To uncover the molecular origins behind

these trends, we performed non-adiabatic molecular dynamics (NAMD) simulations to fol-

low the ES dynamics of Lys. While direct simulation of the experimental aggregates is

precluded by the lack of precise structural data, we can instead model crystal structures of

Lys representing distinct protonation states (Lys2+, Lys+, and Lys0 in Fig. 1). 36–38 These

models offer well-defined frameworks to interpret fluorescence behavior and examine ES pro-

cesses. Our simulations indicate that fluorescence decreases from low to high protonation

states (Lys0 ≳ Lys+ > Lys2+), consistent with our experimental data and prior reports. 4,32

Mechanistically, increased protonation promotes proton transfer (PT) processes that enable

4

pH = 1pH = 4pH = 7pH = 9.8Mole Fraction010.502468101214pHLys2++H3NNH3+OHOLys++H3NNH3+O-OLys0+H3NNH2O-OLys-H2NNH2O-Onon-radiative decay, causing fluorescence quenching under acidic conditions.

As mentioned above, we investigated the morphology of solid-state Lys aggregates formed

at pH 1, 4, 7, and 10, adjusted using either HCl or H2SO4, by optical and scanning electron

microscopy. The characterization was performed on Lys samples prepared in water at the

concentration of 1 g/mL (6.8 mol/L) corresponding to the maximum of its solubility. This

concentration–which is approximately tenfold higher than the critical aggregation concen-

tration (CAC)–ensures the formation of aggregated clusters (see Fig. S1 and discussion in

the Supporting Information (SI)).

Fig. 2 shows clear morphological differences depending on both acid type and pH. Under

strongly acidic conditions (pH = 1), both HCl- and H2SO4-treated samples initially formed

oily films at room temperature, with no macroscopically ordered structures observed over

time. However, upon overnight cooling to 4◦C, well-ordered crystals emerged (Fig. 2a, Lys

+ HCl; Fig. 2e, Lys + H2SO4). Optical microscopy revealed distinct morphologies: HCl-

treated samples formed smaller, densely packed crystals, likely due to enhanced nucleation

promoted by chloride ions. In contrast, H2SO4 promoted the formation of larger, elongated

crystals, suggesting that sulfate anions favor fewer nucleation events, leading to more sparsely

distributed structures. Reheating caused crystals to revert to oily films, preventing further

morphological study.

At pH 4, HCl-treated Lys aggregates (Fig. 2b) formed thin and disperse small fibers,

whereas H2SO4-treated aggregates (Fig. 2f) resulted in denser fibrous networks with a more

compact appearance. This contrast suggests that sulfate ions can promote stronger cross-

linking, leading to a more interconnected aggregation. At pH 7, HCl-derived Lys aggregates

(Fig. 2c) formed a layered, sheet-like morphology, while those acidified with H2SO4 (Fig. 2g)

a more porous, interconnected network, suggesting that sulfate anions promote a web-like

assembly rather than compact layers. At pH 10, both acids yielded fibrous architectures (Fig.

2d, and Fig. 2h), with thinner and more interconnected fibers in HCl-treated samples. Cross-

polarized light microscopy (Fig. S2) revealed birefringence, indicating isotropic organization

5

of the fibrillar network at this pH.

Figure 2: Experimental morphological characterization of solid-state L-Lysine (Lys) aggre- gates prepared at pH 1, 4, 7, and 10 using either HCl (panels a–d) or H2SO4 (panels e–h) as acidifying agents. (a, e) Optical microscopy images of crystalline Lys aggregates formed by drop-casting 6.8 mol/L solutions adjusted to pH 1. (b–d, f–h) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of Lys aggregates at pH 4, 7, and 10 for HCl (b–d) and H2SO4 (f–h) condi- tions. All SEM images were acquired at 3000x magnification with a scale bar of 50 µm.

Overall, optical and scanning electron microscopy reveal that both pH and acid type

influence Lys aggregate morphology. To investigate how these structural differences im-

pact optical properties, we turned to fluorescence-based techniques, starting with confocal

and fluorescence microscopy, followed by steady-state spectroscopy and quantum efficiency

measurements to better quantify the pH dependent fluorescence emission.

Confocal microscopy of Lys aggregates prepared with HCl (Fig. S3) and H2SO4 (Fig. 3)

confirmed the evolution from crystalline-like structures at pH 1 to diffuse fibrillar networks

at pH 4, 7, and 10. This trend is evident in the far-left subpanels of Fig. 3b–d (dark-field

images). For pH 1 (Fig 3a), optical microscopy is shown due to the absence of dark-field

data. Each panel also includes fluorescence microscopy images recorded in the blue (second

column), green (third column), and red (rightmost column) channels. A striking enhance-

ment in fluorescence intensity is observed with increasing pH for both acids: aggregates at

pH 1 exhibit weak or negligible emission across all channels, while those at neutral and basic

6

pH14710b)c)d)f)g)h)50 μma)e)50 μm50 μm50 μm50 μm50 μma)b)f)c)d)g)h)200 μm200 μmconditions (Fig. 3b–d) show stronger fluorescence.

Figure 3: Experimental optical characterization of solid-state L-Lysine (Lys) aggregates prepared at various pH values. Aggregates were deposited on clean coverslip glass and air- dried at room temperature. Confocal microscopy images of Lys aggregates formed at pH 1, 4, 7, and 10 using H2SO4 as the acidifying agent are shown in panel a, b, c, and d, respectively. For each pH, images are arranged left to right as follows: panel a begins with an optical microscopy image (due to unavailability of dark-field data), followed by fluorescence images in the blue (λexc = 402 nm, λemi = 421 nm), green (λexc = 495 nm, λemi = 519 nm), and red (λexc = 590 nm, λemi = 617 nm) channels; panels (b–d) begin with dark-field images followed by the same fluorescence channels. Panels e and f show normalized steady-state fluorescence spectra (λexc=330 nm) of solid Lys samples prepared with HCl and H2SO4, respectively, across the same pH range. External quantum efficiency (Ext. Quant. Eff.) measurements for these samples are shown as green (HCl) and purple (H2SO4) plots in panel g.

To quantify this, we collected steady-state fluorescence spectra across excitation wave-

lengths from 330-410 nm (10 nm step). The resulting spectra for Lys acidified with HCl

and H2SO4 are shown in panels a-d and panels e-h of Fig. S4, respectively. Interestingly,

we observed a linear correlation between excitation and emission wavelengths (Fig. S5 of

the SI), consistent with previous findings in Lys aggregates in solution, 32 and poly-lysine

polymers, 33 where this dependency was attributed to the ability of Lys to form aggregates

7

200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μma)c)200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μmb)200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μmd)14710pHLys -HCl (Exp.)Lys -H2SO4 (Exp.)e)f)g)of various size. Excitation-dependent fluorescence, or red-edge excitation shifts, has been

observed in a variety of systems, including carbon nanodots, 39 sodium-uracil thin films, 40 self-

assembled peptide nucleic acids, 41 and organic fluorescent nanoparticles. 42 Proposed mech-

anisms include heterogeneous aggregate populations, 39 slow environment relaxation around

the excited fluorophore, 40,41 and collective proton motions within HB networks that modu-

late the ES manifold. 42 These findings suggest that the excitation-dependent emission in our

Lys samples likely arises from similarly heterogeneous supramolecular environments, shaped

by protonation state and ionic interactions.

To isolate the role of protonation and acid identity, we compared normalized fluorescence

spectra at λexc = 330 nm for all samples, as shown in Fig. 3e-f. Both acid treatments

yielded broad emissions (350–550 nm), with emission maxima (λmax) centered between 400

nm and 420 nm, depending on pH and acid. For HCl (Fig. 3e), λmax blue-shifts from 422 nm

(pH 1, red line) to 403 nm (pH 10, cyan line), while for H2SO4 (Fig. 3f), the pH 1 sample

shows the most blue-shifted emission (λmax = 401 nm), and all other pH values exhibit

nearly identical spectra (λmax ∼ 414 nm). These subtle spectral differences align with SEM

observations: H2SO4 yields more consistent fibrous morphologies across pH, while HCl shows

greater variation, potentially explaining the progressive red-shift.

While these spectra offer an initial view of how pH influences fluorescence, their nor-

malization masks variations in absolute emission intensity. For this reason, we measured

external quantum efficiency (Fig. 3g), since it accounts for light extraction efficiency 43 and

is therefore particularly relevant for assessing emission in solid-state devices. 44–46 Here, a

striking pH dependence emerges: EQE increases from ∼ 0.5 − 1% at pH 1 for both acid

treatments and rises to nearly 5% at pH 7 for Lys with HCl (green plot) and at pH 7-10 for

Lys with H2SO4 (purple plot), reflecting higher emission efficiency under low protonation.

These trends are consistent with previous studies on solution-phase Lys aggregates, which

linked protonation to fluorescence quenching. 32 Notably, the two acids impart distinct effi-

ciencies: with H2SO4, EQE increases from pH 1 to pH 7 and then plateaus at pH 10, whereas

8

with HCl the efficiency peaks at pH 7 and declines at pH 10. This divergence underscores the

additional role of the counterion, beyond protonation alone, in dictating aggregate structure

and, consequently, solid-state fluorescence efficiency.

Our experimental characterization clearly shows that both pH and counterion modulate

the emission of solid-state Lys aggregates, highlighting the influence of protonation and

aggregation on fluorescence. However, these techniques cannot directly resolve the molecular

origins of this effect, specifically, how protonation state shapes the electronic structure and

ES dynamics. To gain molecular insight into this, we now move to discussing the theoretical

results that emerge from our non-adiabatic molecular dynamics simulations performed on

three Lys crystal models corresponding to distinct protonation states, as shown in Fig. 4.

Structural differences among the lysine crystals reflect protonation-dependent variations

that mirror the pH effects observed in aggregate morphologies, supporting their use as prox-

ies to study solid-state Lys photophysics. As we will see shortly, these models also correctly

reproduce the trends in the emission observed as a function of pH. L-Lys sulfate (LLS, Fig.

4a) adopts a folded conformation stabilized by a dense HB network between SO2−

4 and the

-NH+

3 and CO2H groups of lysine, 36,47 with HBs exclusively between Lys and sulfate and

no direct Lys-Lys interactions due to electrostatic repulsion. In L-Lys monohydrochloride

dihydrate (LLMHCl, Fig. 4b), all amines are protonated, the C-terminus is deprotonated,

and both Lys–Lys and Lys–water HBs are observed. Cl− counterions further stabilize the

structure via electrostatic interactions with both the α- and ε-amino groups. 37,48 The zwit-

terionic L-Lys hemihydrate (LLH, Fig. 4c) forms layers of head-to-head hydrogen bonded

dimers through -NH+

3 · · · CO−

2 interactions, a network of interactions previously linked to

intrinsic fluorescence. 4,38,49

For each crystal, we performed 500 fs NAMD simulations, within a QM/MM framework,

on 50 statistically independent initial conditions (see the Computational Details section in the

SI for details). In Fig. 4a–c, the lysine dimers (rendered with glossy CPK spheres) represent

the QM regions used in our simulations. After 500 fs, most trajectories remained in the first

9

Figure 4: Crystal structures used to model the different protonation states of L-lysine: (a) L-lysine sulfate (LLS), (b) L-lysine monohydrochloride dihydrate (LLMHCl), and (c) L-lysine hemihydrate (LLH). (d) Fraction (%) of surface-hopping trajectories remaining in the excited state S1 (NS1/Ntot) after 500 fs for each system (orange plot). Experimental (Exp.) external quantum efficiencies (Ext. Quant. Eff.) of Lys acidified with HCl (green) and H2SO4 (purple) are shown for comparison. (e) Calculated lowest absorption energies (Exc., vertical bars) and emission spectra (Emis., solid curves) for LLS (blue/red), LLMHCl (magenta/green), and LLH (yellow/cyan). Vertical dashed lines indicate the emission maxima. (f) Molecular orbitals involved in the lowest-energy excitation of LLS: HOMO (left) and LUMO (right), with positive and negative orbital lobes colored in green and purple, respectively.

10

a)b)c)d)e)LLS(pH 1)LLMHCl (pH 7)LLH (pH 10)nπ*f)TheoryES for LLH (pH = 10) and LLMHCl (pH = 7), namely 98% and 92%, respectively, whereas

only 28% remained in S1 for LLS (pH = 1), as shown in Fig. 4d (orange plot). This severe

quenching at low pH mirrors the experimental EQE trend observed in Fig. 3f, reproduced

here for direct comparison, highlighting the key role of protonation in modulating the ES

lifetimes.

In Fig. 4e, we report the fluorescence spectra of LLS (red line), LLMHCl (green line),

and LLH (cyan line) averaged over the trajectories remaining in S1. Vertical lines indicate

the averaged lowest absorption (excitation) transitions: blue (LLS), magenta (LLMHCl),

and yellow (LLH). For all systems, excitation wavelengths cluster near ∼ 210 nm, exhibiting

a ∼120 nm (∼ 2.1 eV) blue-shift relative to experiment. This discrepancy likely arises

from a combination of known TDDFT limitations, such as the tendency of CAM-B3LYP

to overestimate vertical excitation energies, 50 as well as neglect of nuclear quantum effects

(NQEs), and structural defects or disorder. 51,52 Several previous studies have shown that the

inclusion of NQEs can alter both the peak absorption in organic systems by up to ∼1 eV,

as well as affect the line-shape. 2,53–55

Across protonation states, the S0 → S1 transition consistently occurs from the highest

occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) to the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO),

which exhibit n and π∗ character, respectively. An example for LLS is shown in Fig. 4f: the

n-type HOMO localizes on the C-terminal carboxyl and partly on SO2−

4 oxygen atoms, while

the π∗-type LUMO is on the same Lys monomer, primarily on the C-terminal oxygen and

along the CCα bond. Similar localizations occur for LLMHCl (Fig. S6a) and LLH (Fig. S7a),

with the n-type HOMO on CO−

2 oxygens and the π∗-type LUMO on this group and adjacent

Cα. Cl− ions show no active role in LLMHCl. The electron density alternates between the

two QM Lys monomers, consistent with dimer symmetry, and localizes within H-bonding

regions, linking local non-covalent interactions with photoexcited electronic properties.

While the excitation energies show little pH dependence, emission spectra reveal more

pronounced differences. The computed emission trend in Fig. 4e mirrors the one observed

11

experimentally for Lys samples acidified with H2SO4 (Fig. 3f). The crystal representing pH

1 (LLS) shows the most blue-shifted emission (λmax = 320 nm), followed by LLMHCl (pH

7) and LLH (pH 10), both exhibiting emission maxima near 356 nm. Notably, the emission

spectrum of LLMHCl displays an additional broad feature between 460–480 nm, originating

from structures in which excited state distortions–particularly CαCO2 deplanarization–are

partially activated but insufficient to reach the conical intersection (CoIn). This mode,

typically associated with non-radiative decay, 6 in this case gives rise to red-shifted emission

from distorted yet emissive geometries. LLS emission instead exhibits a shoulder near the

excitation energy, suggesting an ES minimum near the Franck-Condon region. Although

emission energies remain overall blue-shifted by 50–80 nm (0.5-0.7 eV) relative to experiment,

this discrepancy is significantly reduced compared to excitation, and spectral tails at longer

wavelengths (λ > 550 nm) are well captured for LLMHCl and LLH. In all three systems, the

S1 → S0 electronic transition retains the same n-π∗ character and orbitals localization as in

the GS excitation (see Figs. S6-S8 in the SI).

Since the calculated emission spectra in Fig. 4e are normalized, this does not directly

allow for a comparison of the intensities. We therefore investigated the oscillator strength (f)

distributions for further insight. Normalized histograms and corresponding Gaussian fits for

LLS, LLMHCl, and LLH are shown in Fig. S9a-c, with an overlay of the fitted curves in Fig.

S9d. For the more fluorescent LLH (cyan) and LLMHCl (green), distributions peak below

0.001, with minor tails up to 0.005. These values indicate modest fluorescence intensity,

well below that of typical aromatic fluorophores, 56 yet sufficient for detection (Fig. 4d). In

contrast, LLS (red) shows a broader distribution with oscillator strengths reaching up to

∼0.01; however, the fluorescence signal is minimal due to the predominance of non-radiative

decay pathways.

Non-radiative decay on the excited state essentially involves fluctuations or distortions

along vibrational modes that lead to the CoIn and subsequently, decay to the ground state.

Previous studies 2,3,6,18,57 have shown that proton transfer (PT), carbonyl stretching, and

12

deplanarization of the amide group act as critical modes in modulating the ES lifetimes

of peptide chains, amyloid-like peptides, and glutamine crystals. Constraining these modes

raises the energy barrier to the conical intersection, prolonging the ES lifetime. More recently,

Banerjee and co-workers 7 linked the weaker fluorescence of cysteine crystals grown in H2O,

as opposed to D2O, to activation of CαN and SH stretching modes. Guided by the n → π∗

character of LLS (Fig. 4f), we first focused on vibrational modes involving the C-terminus, as

shown in Figs. S10-S11 for the two QM Lys monomers. We then investigated the coordinates

associated with the various HBs present in the system (Fig. S12 in the SI). From this

combined set of vibrational modes, a small number of coordinates, shown in Fig. 5, emerge

as the dominant funnels to the CoIn.

The collective motion driving non-radiative decay in LLS (Fig. 5a) can be decomposed

into two main contributions: (i) stretching of the CO bond coupled with deplanarization of

the CαCO2 group, and (ii) PT coordinates involving the NH or OH groups of Lys and the

sulfate oxygen. As shown in Fig. 5b, the CO bond elongates in S1 (orange distribution),

increases further at the CoIn (dashed line), and contracts upon relaxation to S0 (blue distri-

bution). A similar trend is observed for the second CO bond of the carboxylate group (Fig.

S11c). This distortion is concerted with deplanarization of the amide group in S1, followed

by replanarization after decay (Fig. S11d). These features are consistent with previously

reported ES dynamics in non-emissive amino acid crystals, such as L-glutamine. 6

However, unlike glutamine–where CO stretching is triggered by transient strengthening

(PT coordinate < 0) of a -NH+

3 · · · CO hydrogen bond between monomers–LLS exhibits HBs

exclusively with sulfate counterions. As a result, CO bond activation and proton transfer

do not necessarily occur within the same structural unit. The primary HB-related mode

promoting non-radiative decay involves transient weakening of an -NH+

3 · · · SO2−

4 HB in S1,

particularly near the CoIn, with PT typically occurring upon relaxation to S0 (Figs. 5c

and S12f). A secondary PT mode, shown in Fig. 5d, involves the C-terminal OH group

and displays a slight transient HB strengthening in S1, with occasional proton sharing or

13

Figure 5: Probability distribution functions (PDFs) for the vibrational coordinates that gov- ern non-radiative decay in (36) surface-hopping trajectories of L-lysine sulfate (LLS). Panel (a): CPK representation of the quantum-mechanical (QM) region used in the simulations, consisting of a Lys dimer and two sulfate ions. Green circles and ellipses highlight the atomic regions involved in key vibrational modes. PDFs are reported for: (b) C=O stretching mode; (c-d) proton transfer (PT) coordinates, defined as dXH−dOH, where X can be Nsc (c), or Ot (d), while O corresponds to the oxygen atom of the sulfate ion. PDFs corresponding to the ground state S0 are plotted in blue; those for the first excited state S1 are plotted in orange. Dashed green vertical lines indicate the PT coordinate values at which the conical intersec- tion (CoIn) is reached, and non-radiative decay occurs from S1 → S0. Regions of the LLS dimer involved in the modes are shown in the insets. In the PDF plots of the different PT coordinates, MON1 and MON2 refer to the QM Lys monomer on the left and right (panel a), respectively.

14

a)b)c)d)transfer to the sulfate oxygen at the CoIn, and reversion after decay. A significant number

of trajectories that reach the CoIn show PT coordinates below 0.35 ˚A, consistent with a

weakening of the interaction. Collectively, these results highlight that CO bond distortions

and HB fluctuations actively govern the accessibility of the CoIn under acidic conditions,

with the sulfate anion also playing a crucial role in this dynamic behavior.

Similar CO elongation and CαCO2 deplanarization appear in the rare non-radiative tra-

jectories of LLMHCl and LLH (Figs. S13–S14b–d), but no PT occurs in S1 or S0. In both

systems, weakening of the NH· · · O coordinates is observed, with values often exceeding 1

˚A, but stems from other structural distortions driving the non-radiative decay. In LLMHCl,

CO stretching and deplanarization lead to CαC elongation in S0 (Fig. S13e), distancing the

acceptor from the NH donor (Fig. S13f). In LLH, significant CαN stretching near the CoIn

(Fig. S14f) weakens one HB, while the other is disrupted by flipping of the carboxylate group

(Figs. S14g–h). This CαN activation was recently implicated in the weak fluorescence of

cysteine crystals. 7 These decay events, although rare, highlight that under neutral and basic

conditions, non-radiative decay is primarily driven by backbone distortions rather than HB

dynamics. In contrast, under acidic conditions, the combination of enhanced protonation

and the presence of flexible, multiply charged counterions–such as sulfate ions–increases the

dynamical complexity of the hydrogen bonding network, opening new non-radiative path-

ways.

In conclusion, we have combined experiments and theory to investigate the evolution

of fluorescence in solid-state lysine as a function of pH. To the best of our knowledge, the

physical factors and mechanisms controlling intrinsic fluorescence as a function of pH in

non-aromatic supramolecular assemblies remain poorly understood and have been explored

in only a handful of studies. 2,21,32 One of our key findings is that both pH and the counterions

introduced by the acids used to adjust it modulate protonation states and hydrogen bonding

networks, altering the physical and chemical properties of the assemblies.

Using a synergy of microscopy techniques, we reveal subtle yet distinct morphological

15

changes in lysine aggregates from acidic to basic conditions, which correlate with enhanced

fluorescence intensity at higher pH. To rationalize these trends, we performed excited state

molecular dynamics simulations on lysine crystal models, revealing that non-radiative decay

pathways are more accessible at lower pH, consistent with experiments. Specifically, under

acidic conditions, the presence of a counterion forming strong hydrogen bonds with the

amino-acid, activates channels–including proton transfer–that facilitate easy access to the

conical intersection.

Our findings open up important perspectives and challenges on both experimental and

theoretical fronts. Specifically, advancing experimental methods to better characterize local

and macroscopic structures of titratable amino acid aggregates as a function of pH remains a

crucial factor to guide computational modeling. While our models capture qualitative trends,

a unique aspect we uncovered in this study is that the non-radiative decay paths under acidic

conditions involve proton transfer processes for both normal and strong hydrogen bonds. An

important implication of this is that the choice of the QM/MM boundary may suppress or

enhance proton transfer events. While we have found that our conclusions are robust to this

factor (see Fig S15 in the SI), efforts that couple reactive QM/MM boundaries for excited

state dynamics will be interesting to pursue in the future.

Acknowledgement

MM, GDM, DB, and AH acknowledge the European Commission for funding on the ERC

Grant HyBOP 101043272. They also thank CINECA supercomputing (project NAFAA-

HP10B4ZBB2) and MareNostrum5 (project EHPC-EXT-2023E01-029) for computational

resources. CD, AA, and LV acknowledge the project PRIN 2022TSLMHR entitled “Bioma-

terials from peptide self-assembling generated by mimicking protein amyloid-like structures”,

funded by Ministero dell’Universit`a e della Ricerca - NextGenerationEU (European Union).

LC acknowledges Ricerca Corrente Project.

16

Conflict of Interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Data Availability Statement

Additional experimental and computational details; determination of the critical aggrega-

tion concentration; birefringence microscopy images of Lys aggregates acidified with HCl

and H2SO4 at pH 10; confocal fluorescence images of Lys aggregates prepared using HCl;

normalized steady-state fluorescence spectra of Lys aggregates under varying excitation wave-

lengths (HCl and H2SO4); excitation-emission correlation plots; molecular orbitals involved

in excitation and emission of L-Lysine sulfate (LLS), L-Lysine monohydrochloride dihydrate

(LLMHCl), and L-Lysine hemihydrate (LLH); oscillator strength distributions for the three

Lys crystal forms; vibrational coordinate analyses from trajectories undergoing non-radiative

decay (LLS, LLMHCl, LLH); validation of the QM/MM setup for LLS; and additional ref-

erences.

Supporting Information Available

Experimental Details

Chemicals

L-Lysine (Lys) monohydrate, HCl (37%wt) and H2SO4 (96%wt) were purchased by Thermo

Fisher Scientific (Milan, Italy).

17

Samples preparation

All solutions were prepared by weight dissolving Lys in doubly distilled water; their pH was

adjusted using HCl (37%wt) and H2SO4 (96%wt). pH was measured by pH-meter (Mettler

Toledo FiveEasy Plus pH meter FP20, equipped with a micro electrode).

Fluorescence spectroscopy

Fluorescence spectra were collected at room temperature on a Jasco spectrofluorophotome-

ter (Model FP-8550), equipped with a continuous output Xenon arc lamp. Measurements in

solution were conducted in a quartz cell with a 1.0 cm path length. Solid state fluorescence

and photoluminescence quantum yields (PLQYs) were evaluated using an ILF-835 integrat-

ing sphere. PLQY was measured by the absolute method thereby overcoming the issue of

unavoidable differences in the relative emission intensities arising from poorly reproducible

drop-casted amino acid clusters. Fluorescence spectra of Lys at the solid state were acquired

in a window up to 600 nm, probing the 330–410 nm excitation range at 10 nm steps. All

acquisitions were averaged over five measurements after spectral correction.

Confocal microscopy

After drop-casting on a microscope slide the Lys water solutions at various states of proto-

nation and letting them dry overnight, samples were analyzed using a ×1.6 and ×10 magni-

fications on the MICA microhub (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany) platform. Fluorescence images

were obtained using filters in the spectral regions of blue (λexc = 402 nm, λem = 421 nm),

green (λexc = 495 nm, λem = 519 nm), and red (λexc = 590 nm, λem = 617 nm).

Optical microscopy

To prepare the samples, 20 µL of each Lys solution was placed onto a glass microscope slide

and air-dried overnight at room temperature. The obtained samples were examined using an

18

Optech BM80Pol microscope (Milan, Italy) for both cross polarized and bright-field light.

Scanning Electron Microscopy

Morphological analysis of samples was carried out by field emission scanning electron micro-

scope (ThermoFisher Scientific Phenom Pro G6). 10 µL of Lys solutions were drop-casted

on an aluminum stub and air-dried. A 7 nm coat of gold was sputtered at a current of 25

mA for 75 sec. The gold coated samples were then introduced into the specimen chamber

and the images were acquired in high vacuum mode, at an accelerating voltage of 15 kV,

through the Secondary Electron Detector (SED).

Critical Aggregation Concentration Measuraments

Critical aggregation concentration (CAC) value for Lys in water was determined by fluores-

cence spectroscopy. In detail, two different fluorophores: a) 8-anilino-1-naphthalene sulfonic

acid ammonium salt (ANS) and b) pyrene (pyr) were separately titrated with increasing

amounts of the amino acid water solution. Fluorescence spectra were collected at room

temperature on a Jasco spectrofluorophotometer (Model FP-8550), acquiring measurements

in a quartz cell with a 1.0 cm path length at room temperature. The other experimental

settings are: excitation and emission bandwidths = 5 nm; recording speed = 120 nm·min−1,

excitation wavelength = 350 nm and 335 nm for ANS and pyr, respectively. The mea-

surement was performed by adding small aliquots of the amino acid in 200 µL of 200 µM

ANS or 10 µM pyr water solution. At the end of the titration, the blank was subtracted.

Fluorescence spectra were corrected for the blank and adjusted for the dilution. Tendency

lines were extracted using a least squares method extrapolation. Titrations were conducted

in triplicate. In the ANS method, the CAC value was determined by linear least-squares

fitting the fluorescence emission at 475 nm, upon excitation at 350 nm versus the amino acid

concentration as previously reported. 58 In the pyr method, the CAC value was determined

by the break-point of the fitting of I1/I3 upon excitation at 335 nm versus the amino acid

19

concentration. 59

Computational Details

Classical molecular dynamics

Lys systems corresponding to different protonation states were modeled using crystallo-

graphic structures of L-Lysine sulfate (LLS), L-Lysine monohydrochloride (LLMHCl), and

L-Lysine hemihydrate (LLH). Supercells of appropriate size were built for each system:

15×8×8 for LLS, 11×5×11 for LLMHCl, and 7×11×6 for LLH. Classical molecular dy-

namics (MD) simulations were performed using the AMBER MD package version 2023 60,61

with the Generalized Amber Force Field (GAFF) 62 applied to all molecular mechanics (MM)

atoms. Each system was first equilibrated in the NVT ensemble at 300 K for 10 ns using a 2

fs time step and a Langevin thermostat 63 with a collision frequency, γ, of 1.0 ps−1. Next, a 50

ns production run was performed under the same conditions, with all bonds involving hydro-

gen atoms constrained. From this trajectory, 50 independent frames were extracted at 1 ns

intervals and used as starting geometries for the subsequent quantum mechanics/molecular

mechanics (QM/MM) simulations.

Ground state QM/MM

To accurately capture the luminescent properties of the Lys crystals, it is essential to account

for the influence of the surrounding environment. As fully QM treatment of the entire sys-

tem is computationally prohibitive, we employed a hybrid QM/MM approach. 64,65 For each

crystal, we selected relevant QM regions (dimers; see Fig. 4a–c in the Main Text) from the 50

uncorrelated frames extracted from classical MD simulations. Thermal equilibration of each

QM region at 300 K was performed using ORCA 5.0.4 66–70 (QM) interfaced with AMBER

2023 60,61 (MM). The QM region was treated using the CAM-B3LYP exchange-correlation

(xc) functional 71 and the def2-SVP basis set 72,73 with the RIJ-COSX approximation 74 to

20

accelerate Coulomb and exact exchange integral evaluations. Equilibration was carried out

for 1 ps in the NVT ensemble at 300 K using a Langevin thermostat 63 with tight coupling

(γ = 10.0 ps−1) and no bond constraints. A 0.5 fs time step was used for 1 ps, followed

by an additional 1 ps with a standard thermostat coupling (γ = 1.0 ps−1). Final nuclear

coordinates and velocities from these equilibrated QM/MM trajectories were used as initial

conditions for the non-adiabatic molecular dynamics (NAMD) simulations described below.

In addition, vertical excitation energies were computed from these equilibrated struc-

tures to characterize the absorption spectra and identify relevant transitions. These time-

dependent DFT (TDDFT) calculations were performed using the same ORCA/AMBER

QM/MM framework, but with no MD propagation (0 MD steps), and the same xc func-

tional, basis set, and approximations described above. For each Lys crystal system, the ten

lowest singlet excited states were computed for 50 equilibrated initial conditions. Excitation

plots shown in Fig. 4e in the Main Text correspond to the averaged energies of the lowest-

energy absorption transition across these 50 frames. Molecular orbitals involved in these

transitions were obtained using a post-processing tool available in ORCA.

Non-adiabatic molecular dynamics

NAMD simulations were performed using the Trajectory Surface Hopping (TSH) method,

specifically employing the SHARC formalism, 75,76 which extends Tully’s Fewest Switches

Surface Hopping (FSSH) 77 to incorporate both time-dependent non-adiabatic couplings (TD-

NACs) and spin–orbit couplings on an equal footing. In this approach, nuclei evolve clas-

sically on quantum potential energy surfaces computed on-the-fly. For further background,

we refer the reader to comprehensive reviews of TSH methodology. 78–81

All simulations–50 for each system–included the first 5 singlet states (S0 − S4) to ade-

quately describe the lowest excited states relevant for fluorescence studies. Each trajectory

was initialized on the first excited state (S1) and propagated in the NVE ensemble for 500

fs with a time-step of 0.5 fs using the velocity Verlet integration algorithm. 82,83 The func-

21

tional and basis set used in the ground-state QM/MM dynamics were kept unchanged in

the NAMD simulations. Excitation energies and oscillator strengths were calculated at the

TDDFT 84 level, within the Tamm-Dancoff approximation (TDA), 85 which improves TDDFT

behavior near conical intersections. 86–88 NACs were computed via the Hammes-Schiffer–Tully

scheme 89 based on wavefunction overlap integrals between successive time steps. Electronic

dynamics were integrated using 25 sub-steps per nuclear time step, and decoherence effects

were included using the energy-based correction of Granucci et al. 90 with a 0.1 Hartree

parameter.

Surface hops to S0 were allowed when the energy gap between the current state and S0

was below 0.2 eV, consistent with prior TDDFT-based NAMD studies. 91–93 Kinetic energy

was rescaled along the direction of the NAC vector to conserve energy during allowed hops;

frustrated hops were discarded.

Simulations were performed using SHARC 3.0.1 94 for surface hopping, ORCA 5.0.4 66–70

for quantum chemical calculations, and TINKER 6.3.3 95 for MM dynamics.

Validation of the QM/MM scheme

The definition of the QM region is a critical factor for reliably capturing excited-state (ES)

dynamics, particularly for proton transfer (PT) processes, which are known to be sensitive

to the QM/MM boundary in flexible or solvated systems. 96,97 Although we focus on crystals,

where structural rigidity simplifies this choice, 6 we assessed the robustness of our conclusions

by expanding the QM region in the LLS system to include a third SO2− 4

counterion. In our

default setup, only one C-terminus of the Lys dimer interacts with a QM-level sulfate ion,

while the second interfaces with a classical one. This modified setup allows us to evaluate

whether explicitly treating both counterions at the QM level significantly alters the key

vibrational modes involved in non-radiative decay. To this end, we selected five equilibrated

initial conditions and re-equilibrated the system in the ground state for 1 ps using the

enlarged QM region, following the same protocol as the second equilibration step described

22

above. The final nuclear positions and velocities of these new QM/MM trajectories were

then used to carry out 1 ps NAMD trajectories. All NAMD parameters were kept identical

to those employed in the main simulations.

Supplementary Text

Determination of the Critical Aggregation Concentration

Lys samples for the experimental morphological and optical characterization were prepared

by dissolving the amino acid powder in double distilled water at the concentration of 1 g/mL

(6.8 mol/L), which corresponds to the maximum of its solubility. Under these conditions,

an increase of the volume of ∼ 70% was observed, and the resulting solution exhibited a

slight yellow coloration. The pH of the resulting solution was basic (pH = 11.8). Given

the known ability of single amino acids to self-assemble into supramolecular structure, 98 the

formation of Lys aggregates was investigated using two environment-sensitive fluorescent

probes: ANS and pyr, as shown in Fig. S1. 99 Both dyes are known to be able to change their

fluorescence properties as function of the surrounding chemical environment (hydrophobic or

hydrophilic). ANS shows a characteristic emission peak between 460-480 nm in hydrophobic

environments, such as the inner micellar compartment 100 or aromatic peptide aggregate

spine. 101 The fluorescence of pyr, on the other hand, is characterized by five vibrational

bands, where the intensity ratio between the first (I1 at 373 nm) and third (I3 at 383 nm)

bands serves as a sensitive indicator of environmental polarity.

The CAC of Lys was estimated from the inflection points of fluorescence titration curves

(Fig. S1). CAC values determined using ANS (0.915 mol/L) and pyr (0.888 mol/L) fluo-

rophores are in good agreement, supporting the reliability of the measurements. These values

are slightly higher than the previously reported estimate of 0.5 mol/L by Stagi et al., 32 who

identified a change in the fluorescence intensity slope as a function of concentration: at lower

concentrations, intensity increased linearly, while at higher concentrations (from 0.4 mol/L),

23

the rate of increase slowed, suggesting the formation of larger, less fluorescent aggregates.

The fact that the ANS and pyr calculated values are below the Lys solubility (solubity/CAC

∼7.5) confirms that Lys aggregates, or smaller clusters, are present under the experimental

conditions investigated.

24

Supplementary Figures

Figure S1: Fluorescence titration of 200 µM ANS (A) and 10 µM pyr (B) with increasing amount of Lys. Critical aggregation concentration values are established from the graphical break points of the titrations.

25

a)b)Figure S2: Panel a and b show the birefringence of Lys acidified with HCl at pH = 10 under bright field (left, panel a) and cross-polarized light (right, panel b). Similar results are reported for Lys acidified with H2SO4 in panel c and d.

26

a)b)c)d)Figure S3: Confocal microscopy images of Lys aggregates formed at pH 1, 4, 7, and 10 using HCl as the acidifying agent are shown in panel a, b, c, and d, respectively. For each pH, images are arranged from left to right as follows: panel (a) begins with an optical microscopy image (used in place of dark-field due to unavailability), followed by fluorescence images recorded in the blue (λexc = 402 nm, λemi = 421 nm), green (λexc = 495 nm, λemi = 519 nm), and red (λexc = 590 nm, λemi = 617 nm) channels. Panels (b–d) begin with dark-field images followed by the same fluorescence channels.

27

200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μm200 μma)b)14710pHc)d)Figure S4: Normalized fluorescence spectra of Lys in HCl (a-d) and H2SO4 (e-h) at vary- ing pH values, plotted as a function of excitation wavelength (330–410 nm). Spectra were normalized to their maximum emission intensity to highlight shifts in peak positions with increasing excitation wavelength. Panels correspond to different pH values: (a, e) pH 1; (b, f) pH 4; (c, g) pH 7; (d, h) pH 10.

28

a)b)c)d)e)f)g)h)Lys -HClLys -H2SO4Figure S5: Plots of the maxima positions as function of the excitation wavelength at different pH conditions (1, 4, 7, and 10) for Lys acidified with HCl (panel a) and H2SO4 (panel b). R2 and slope values of the linear best-fit curves are reported in the table in panel c.

29

a)b)c)Figure S6: Molecular orbitals involved in the (a) excitation (S0 → S1) and (b) emission (S1 → S0) transitions of L-Lysine monohydrochloride dihydrate (LLMHCl). Both transitions show an n → π∗ character. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) are shown on the left and right, respectively. For consistency, the emission is depicted using the same orbital configuration as the excitation (i.e., in the S0 → S1 direction). Positive and negative lobes of the MOS are shown in green and purple, respectively.

30

LLMHCla)b)Excitationnπ*Emissionnπ*Figure S7: Molecular orbitals involved in the (a) excitation (S0 → S1) and (b) emission (S1 → S0) transitions of L-Lysine hemihydrate (LLH). Both transitions show an n → π∗ character. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) are shown on the left and right, respectively. For consistency, the emission is depicted using the same orbital configuration as the excitation (i.e., in the S0 → S1 direction). Positive and negative lobes of the MOS are shown in green and purple, respectively.

31

a)LLHb)Excitationnπ*Emissionnπ*Figure S8: Molecular orbitals (MOs) involved in the emission (S1 → S0) transition of L-Lysine sulfate (LLS). For consistency, the emission is depicted using the same orbital configuration as the excitation (i.e., in the S0 → S1 direction), which is shown in Fig. 4f in the main text. Both transitions show an n → π∗ character. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) are shown on the left and right, respectively. Positive and negative lobes of the MOS are shown in green and purple, respectively.

32

Emissionnπ*LLSFigure S9: Normalized histograms of oscillator strength (f) distributions and corresponding Gaussian fits for the three L-Lysine crystals: a) L-Lysine sulfate (LLS), b) L-Lysine mono- hydrochloride (LLMHCl), and c) L-Lysine hemihydrate (LLH). Panel d) displays only the Gaussian fits from panels (a–c) for direct comparison of the probability density functions across different protonation states.

33

a)b)c)d)Figure S10: Probability distribution functions (PDFs) for selected vibrational coordinates of one of the two L-Lysine sulfate (LLS) monomers within the quantum mechanics (QM) region (monomer 1, shown in panel a). Atoms of monomer 1 are depicted as glossy spheres, while the remaining atoms of the QM dimer are shown transparently. PDFs are reported for: (b, c) the two C=O stretching modes; (d) deplanarization of the Cα–C–O–O fragment; (e) the CαC σ-bond stretch; and (f) the CαN σ-bond stretch. PDFs corresponding to the ground state S0 are plotted in blue; those for the first excited state S1 are plotted in orange. Dashed green vertical lines indicate the PT coordinate values at which the conical intersection (CoIn) is reached, and non-radiative decay occurs from S1 → S0.

34

c)d)e)f)Monomer 1O1O2b)a)Figure S11: Probability distribution functions (PDFs) for selected vibrational coordinates of one of the two L-Lysine sulfate (LLS) monomers within the quantum mechanics (QM) region (monomer 2, shown in panel a). Atoms of monomer 2 are depicted as glossy spheres, while the remaining atoms of the QM dimer are shown transparently. PDFs are reported for: (b, c) the two C=O stretching modes; (d) deplanarization of the Cα–C–O–O fragment; (e) the CαC σ-bond stretch; and (f) the CαN σ-bond stretch. PDFs corresponding to the ground state S0 are plotted in blue; those for the first excited state S1 are plotted in orange. Dashed green vertical lines indicate the PT coordinate values at which the conical intersection (CoIn) is reached, and non-radiative decay occurs from S1 → S0.

35

c)d)e)f)Monomer 2O1O2b)a)Figure S12: Probability distribution functions (PDFs) for the proton transfer (PT) coordi- nate, defined as dXH − dOH, where X = N or O of an L-Lysine sulfate (LLS) monomer treated at the quantum-mechanical (QM) level, and O belongs to the SO2− counterion of the QM 4 region. (a)–(c) refer to QM monomer 1 (MON1), while (d)–(f) refer to QM monomer 2 (MON2). Geometries of the dimers are shown in panels a) and d): atoms involved in the analyzed coordinates are shown as glossy spheres; all other atoms are rendered transparently. Panels b) and e) show the PT coordinate involving the side-chain N atom of monomers 1 and 2, respectively. Panels c) and f) display the PT coordinate involving the terminal oxygen atom of monomer 1 and the terminal nitrogen atom of monomer 2. PDFs corresponding to the ground state S0 are plotted in blue; those for the first excited state S1 are plotted in orange. Dashed green vertical lines indicate the PT coordinate values at which the conical intersection (CoIn) is reached, and non-radiative decay occurs from S1 → S0.

36

c)d)e)f)Monomer 2b)a)Monomer 1Figure S13: Probability distribution functions (PDFs) for the vibrational coordinates that govern non-radiative decay in four surface-hopping trajectories of L-Lysine monohydrochlo- ride (LLMHCl). Panel (a): geometry of the dimer treated at the quantum-mechanical (QM) level. Atoms involved in the analyzed coordinates are shown as glossy spheres; all other atoms are rendered transparently. PDFs are reported for: (b, c) the two C=O stretching modes; (d) deplanarization of the Cα–C–O–O fragment; (e) the CαC σ-bond stretch; (f) the CαN σ-bond stretch. Similar results were observed for the corresponding coordinates in the other QM monomer. PDFs corresponding to the ground state S0 are plotted in blue; those for the first excited state S1 are plotted in orange. Dashed green vertical lines indicate the PT coordinate values at which the conical intersection (CoIn) is reached, and non-radiative decay occurs from S1 → S0.

37

c)d)e)f)a)b)Figure S14: Probability distribution functions (PDFs) for the vibrational coordinates that govern non-radiative decay in a surface-hopping trajectory of L-Lysine hemihydrate (LLH). Panel (a): geometry of the dimer treated at the quantum-mechanical level. Atoms involved in the analyzed coordinates are shown as glossy spheres; all other atoms are rendered trans- parently. PDFs are reported for: (b, c) the two C=O stretching modes; (d) deplanarization of the Cα–C–O–O fragment; (e) the CαC σ-bond stretch; (f) the CαN σ-bond stretch; and (g, h) the two alternative proton transfer (PT) coordinates, defined as dNtH−dOH. PDFs corresponding to the ground state S0 are plotted in blue; those for the first excited state S1 are plotted in orange. Dashed green vertical lines indicate the PT coordinate values at which the conical intersection (CoIn) is reached, and non-radiative decay occurs from S1 → S0.

38

a)b)c)d)e)f)g)h)Figure S15: Time-series evolution of vibrational modes driving non-radiative decay in L- Lysine sulfate (LLS) with an extended QM region. Panel (a) shows the QM subsystem used in this validation test, comprising a Lys dimer and three sulfate anions. This setup was employed to assess whether including an additional sulfate ion alters the decay mecha- nism observed in the standard QM/MM partitioning. Panels (b–e) show the time evolution (orange lines) of key vibrational coordinates for one representative trajectory (Traj.): (b) C=O coordinate (Coord.), and (c–e) proton transfer (PT) coordinates, defined as dXH – dOH, where X = N (c) or O (d–e) from Lys, and O corresponds to the acceptor oxygen atom of SO2− 4 . Dashed green vertical lines indicate the mode values at which the conical intersection (CoIn) is reached, and non-radiative decay occurs from S1 → S0.

39

a)b)c)d)e)References

(1) Lakowicz, J. R. Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy; Springer US: Boston, MA,

2006; pp 27–61, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-46312-4_2.

(2) Pinotsi, D.; Grisanti, L.; Mahou, P.; Gebauer, R.; Kaminski, C. F.; Hassanali, A.;

Kaminski Schierle, G. S. Proton Transfer and Structure-Specific Fluorescence in Hy-

drogen Bond-Rich Protein Structures. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 138, 3046–3057, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.5b11012.

(3) Grisanti, L.;

Sapunar, M.; Hassanali, A.; Doˇsli´c, N. Toward Understand-

ing Optical Properties

of Amyloids:

A Reaction Path and Nonadia-

batic Dynamics Study. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2020, 142, 18042–18049, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.0c07134.

(4) Arnon, Z. A.; Kreiser, T.; Yakimov, B.; Brown, N.; Aizen, R.; Shaham-Niv, S.;

Makam, P.; Qaisrani, M. N.; Poli, E.; Ruggiero, A.; others On-off transition and

ultrafast decay of amino acid luminescence driven by modulation of supramolecular

packing. Iscience 2021, 24, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2021.102695.

(5) Tang, S.; Yang, T.; Zhao, Z.; Zhu, T.; Zhang, Q.; Hou, W.; Yuan, W. Z. Noncon-

ventional luminophores: characteristics, advancements and perspectives. Chem. Soc.

Rev. 2021, 50, 12616–12655, DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/D0CS01087A.

(6) Mir´on, G. D.; Semelak, J. A.; Grisanti, L.; Rodriguez, A.; Conti, I.; Stella, M.;

Velusamy, J.; Seriani, N.; Doˇsli´c, N.; Rivalta, I.; others The carbonyl-lock mecha-

nism underlying non-aromatic fluorescence in biological matter. Nat. Commun. 2023,

14, 7325, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42874-3.

(7) Banerjee, D.; Chibh, S.; Tiwari, O. S.; Mir´on, G. D.; Monti, M.; Yakir, H. R.;

Pawar, S.; Fixler, D.; Shimon, L. J. W.; Gazit, E.; Hassanali, A. Crystallization

40

of L-Cysteine in Heavy Water Induces Intrinsic Fluorescence. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.

2025, 64, e202505331, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.202505331.

(8) Zhang, Q.; Zhao, Z.; Yang, G.; Li, A.; Cui, Y.; Cai, Y.; Yin, Z.; Tan, Y.; Zhou, C.;

Peng, Q.; Yuan, W. Z. Synergistic Photoluminescence Enhancement in Nonaromatic

Amino Acids and Sugars via Glycosylation. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 2423603, DOI:

https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202423603.

(9) Luo, J.; Xie, Z.; Lam, J. W. Y.; Cheng, L.; Chen, H.; Qiu, C.; Kwok, H. S.;

Zhan, X.; Liu, Y.; Zhu, D.; Tang, B. Z. Aggregation-induced emission of

1-methyl-1,2,3,4,5-pentaphenylsilole. Chem. Commun. 2001,

1740–1741, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1039/B105159H.

(10) He, Z.; Ke, C.; Tang, B. Z. Journey of Aggregation-Induced Emission Research. ACS

Omega 2018, 3, 3267–3277, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.8b00062.

(11) Zhao, Z.; Zhang, H.; Lam, J. W. Y.; Tang, B. Z. Aggregation-Induced Emission: New

Vistas at the Aggregate Level. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2020, 59, 9888–9907, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201916729.

(12) Yu, M.; Huang, R.; Guo, J.; Zhao, Z.; Tang, B. Z. Promising applications of

aggregation-induced emission luminogens in organic optoelectronic devices. PhotoniX

2020, 1, 1–33, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1186/s43074-020-00012-y.

(13) del Mercato, L. L.; Pompa, P. P.; Maruccio, G.; Torre, A. D.; Sabella, S.; Tam-

burro, A. M.; Cingolani, R.; Rinaldi, R. Charge transport and intrinsic fluores-

cence in amyloid-like fibrils. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2007, 104, 18019–18024, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0702843104.

(14) Chen, X.; Luo, W.; Ma, H.; Peng, Q.; Yuan, W. Z.; Zhang, Y. Prevalent intrinsic

emission from nonaromatic amino acids and poly (amino acids). Sci. China Chem.

2018, 61, 351–359, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11426-017-9114-4.

41

(15) Lapshina, N.; Shishkin, I. I.; Nandi, R.; Noskov, R. E.; Barhom, H.; Joseph, S.;

Apter, B.; Ellenbogen, T.; Natan, A.; Ginzburg, P.; Amdursky, N.; Rosenman, G.

Bioinspired Amyloid Nanodots with Visible Fluorescence. Adv. Opt. Mater. 2019, 7,

1801400, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/adom.201801400.

(16) Wang, Q.; Dou, X.; Chen, X.; Zhao, Z.; Wang, S.; Wang, Y.; Sui, K.;

Tan, Y.; Gong, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Yuan, W. Z. Reevaluating Protein Photolumi-

nescence: Remarkable Visible Luminescence upon Concentration and Insight into

the Emission Mechanism. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2019, 58, 12667–12673, DOI:

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/anie.201906226.

(17) Shukla, A.; Mukherjee, S.; Sharma, S.; Agrawal, V.; Radha Kishan, K.; Gup-

tasarma, P. A novel UV laser-induced visible blue radiation from protein crystals

and aggregates: scattering artifacts or fluorescence transitions of peptide electrons de-

localized through hydrogen bonding? Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2004, 428, 144–153,

DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2004.05.007.

(18) Stephens, A. D. et al. Short hydrogen bonds enhance nonaromatic protein-

related fluorescence. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2021, 118,

e2020389118, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2020389118.

(19) Fung, S. Y.; Duhamel, J.; Chen, P. Solvent Effect on the Photophysical Properties of

the Anticancer Agent Ellipticine. J. Phys. Chem. A 2006, 110, 11446–11454, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1021/jp062778y.

(20) Clementi, C.; Carlotti, B.; Burattini, C.; Pellegrino, R.; Romani, A.; Eli-

sei, F. Effect of hydrogen bonding interaction on the photophysics of α-amino-

orcein. Spectrochim. Acta A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 2019, 214, 522–530, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.saa.2019.02.057.

(21) Wang, X.; Yang, Y.; Yang, H.; Dong, H. The Intrinsic Fluorescence of Peptide Self-

42

Assemblies Across pH Levels. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2025, 64, e202420567, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.202420567.

(22) Wang, Z.-G.; Wang, H.; Liu, Q.; Duan, F.; Shi, X.; Ding, B. Designed Self-Assembly of

Peptides with G-Quadruplex/Hemin DNAzyme into Nanofibrils Possessing Enzyme-

Mimicking Active Sites and Catalytic Functions. ACS Catalysis 2018, 8, 7016–7024,

DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.8b00896.

(23) Sarkhel, B.; Chatterjee, A.; Das, D. Covalent Catalysis by Cross β

Amyloid Nanotubes.

J. Am. Chem. Soc 2020,

142,

4098–4103, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.9b13517.

(24) McCahill, A. L.; Zhang, T.; Saven, J. G.; Kloxin, C. J.; Pochan, D. J. Peptide

Bundlemer Networks or Lattices: Controlling Cross-Linking and Self-Assembly Us-

ing Protein-like Display of Chemistry. ACS Nano 2024, 18, 25695–25707, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c07961.

(25) Li, T.; Lu, X.-M.; Zhang, M.-R.; Hu, K.; Li, Z. Peptide-based nanomaterials:

Self-assembly, properties and applications. Bioact. Mater. 2022, 11, 268–282, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2021.09.029.

(26) White, A. Effect of pH on fluorescence of tyrosine, tryptophan and related compounds.

Biochem. J. 1959, 71, 217–220, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1042/bj0710217.

(27) Steiner, R. F.; Edelhoch, H. The ultraviolet fluorescent of proteins I. The influ-

ence of pH and temperature. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1963, 66, 341–355, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-3002(63)91203-4.

(28) Berezin, M.; Kao, J.; Achilefu, S. pH-dependent optical properties of syn-

thetic fluorescent

imidazoles. Chem. Eur. J. 2009,

15,

3560–3566, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1002/chem.200801784.

43

(29) Han, J.; Burgess, K. Fluorescent Indicators for Intracellular pH. Chem. Rev. 2010,

110, 2709–2728, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/cr900249z.

(30) Steinegger, A.; Wolfbeis, O. S.; Borisov, S. M. Optical Sensing and Imaging of pH

Values: Spectroscopies, Materials, and Applications. Chem. Rev. 2020, 120, 12357–

12489, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.0c00451.

(31) Nolting, D.; Aziz, E. F.; Ottosson, N.; Faubel, M.; Hertel, I. V.; Winter, B. pH-

Induced Protonation of Lysine in Aqueous Solution Causes Chemical Shifts in X-

ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2007, 129, 14068–14073, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1021/ja072971l.

(32) Stagi, L.; Farris, R.; de Villiers Engelbrecht, L.; Mocci, F.; Maria Car-

bonaro, C.;

Innocenzi, P. At the root of

l-lysine emission in aqueous solu-

tions. Spectrochim. Acta - A: Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 2022, 283, 121717, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.saa.2022.121717.

(33) Stagi, L.; Malfatti, L.; Caboi, F.; Innocenzi, P. Thermal Induced Polymerization of

l-Lysine forms Branched Particles with Blue Fluorescence. Macromol. Chem. Phys.

2021, 222, 2100242, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/macp.202100242.

(34) Stagi, L.; Sini, M.; Carboni, D.; Anedda, R.; Siligardi, G.; Gianga, T.-M.; Hus-

sain, R.; Innocenzi, P. Modulating the poly-l-lysine structure through the control

of the protonation–deprotonation state of l-lysine. Sci. Rep. 2022, 12, 19719, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-24109-5.

(35) Kastinen, T.; Lupa, D.; Bonarek, P.; Fedorov, D.; Morga, M.; Linder, M. B.; Lutken-

haus, J. L.; Batys, P.; Sammalkorpi, M. pH dependence of the assembly mechanism

and properties of poly(l-lysine) and poly(l-glutamic acid) complexes. Phys. Chem.

Chem. Phys. 2023, 25, 18182–18196, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/D3CP01421E.

44

(36) Capasso, S.; Mattia, C. A.; Mazzarella, L.; Zagari, A. l-Lysine sulphate,

C6H16N2O2+

2 .SO2−

4 : a novel conformation of the l-lysine side chain. Acta Cryst. C

1983, 39, 281–283, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1107/S0108270183004400.

(37) Wright, D.

t.; Marsh, R. The

crystal

structure

of L-lysine mono-

hydrochloride

dihydrate.

Acta

Cryst.

1962,

15,

54–64,

DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1107/S0365110X62000122.

(38) Williams, P. A.; Hughes, C. E.; Harris, K. D. M. L-Lysine: Exploiting Powder X-

ray Diffraction to Complete the Set of Crystal Structures of the 20 Directly En-

coded Proteinogenic Amino Acids. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2015, 54, 3973–3977, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201411520.

(39) Sharma, A.; Gadly, T.; Gupta, A.; Ballal, A.; Ghosh, S. K.; Kumbhakar, M. Origin of

Excitation Dependent Fluorescence in Carbon Nanodots. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2016,

7, 3695–3702, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.6b01791.

(40) Pale, V.; Giedraityte, Z.; Chen, X.;

Lopez-Acevedo, O.; Tittonen,

I.;

Karppinen, M.

Excitation-dependent

fluorescence

from atomic/molecular

layer deposited sodium-uracil

thin films. Sci. Rep. 2017,

7,

6982, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-07456-6.

(41) Berger, O.; Adler-Abramovich, L.; Levy-Sakin, M.; Grunwald, A.; Liebes-Peer, Y.;

Bachar, M.; Buzhansky, L.; Mossou, E.; Forsyth, V. T.; Schwartz, T.; Eben-

stein, Y.; Frolow, F.; Shimon, L. J. W.; Patolsky, F.; Gazit, E. Light-

emitting self-assembled peptide nucleic acids exhibit both stacking interactions

and Watson–Crick base pairing. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2015, 10, 353–360, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2015.27.

(42) Lee, K.-M.; Cheng, W.-Y.; Chen, C.-Y.; Shyue, J.-J.; Nieh, C.-C.; Chou, C.-F.; Lee, J.-

R.; Lee, Y.-Y.; Cheng, C.-Y.; Chang, S. Y.; others Excitation-dependent visible fluo-

45

rescence in decameric nanoparticles with monoacylglycerol cluster chromophores. Nat.

Commun. 2013, 4, 1544, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms2563.

(43) Park, J.;

Shin, S.;

Zheng, D.-G.; Kim, K. S.; Han, D.-P. Compar-

ative Study

on Temperature-Dependent

Internal Quantum Efficiency

and

Light–Extraction Efficiency in III-Nitride–, III-Phosphide–, and III-Arsenide–based

Light-Emitting Diodes. Phys. Status Solidi A 2024,

221,

2400063, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1002/pssa.202400063.

(44) Liu, T.; Zhu, L.; Zhong, C.; Xie, G.; Gong, S.; Fang, J.; Ma, D.; Yang, C.

Naphthothiadiazole-based near-infrared emitter with a photoluminescence quan-

tum yield of 60% in neat film and external quantum efficiencies of up to

3.9% in nondoped OLEDs. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2017, 27, 1606384, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201606384.

(45) Song, J.; Kim, K.-H.; Kim, E.; Moon, C.-K.; Kim, Y.-H.; Kim, J.-J.; Yoo, S.

Lensfree OLEDs with over 50% external quantum efficiency via external scat-

tering and horizontally oriented emitters. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 3207, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-05671-x.

(46) Jang, H. M.; Kim, J.-S.; Heo, J.-M.; Lee, T.-W. Enhancing photoluminescence quan-

tum efficiency of metal halide perovskites by examining luminescence-limiting factors.

APL Mater. 2020, 8, 020904, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5136308.

(47) Krishnakumar, V.; Manohar, S.; Nagalakshmi, R. Semiorganic nonlinear optical l-

lysine sulphate growth and characterization. Spectrochim. Acta Part A 2010, 75, 1394–

1397, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.saa.2009.12.081.

(48) Ramesh Babu, R.;

Vijayan, N.;

Gopalakrishnan, R.;

Ramasamy, P.

Growth and characterization of L-lysine monohydrochloride dihydrate

(L-

46

LMHCl)

single

crystal. Cryst. Res. Technol. 2006,

41,

405–410, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2019.06.587.

(49) Williams, P. A.; Hughes, C. E.; Martin, J.; Courvoisier, E.; Buanz, A. B. M.; Ga-

isford, S.; Harris, K. D. M. Understanding the Solid-State Hydration Behavior of

a Common Amino Acid:

Identification, Structural Characterization, and Hydra-

tion/Dehydration Processes of New Hydrate Phases of l-Lysine. J. Phys. Chem. C

2016, 120, 9385–9392, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b12420.

(50) Shao, Y.; Mei, Y.;

Sundholm, D.; Kaila, V. R.

I. Benchmarking the

Performance

of Time-Dependent Density Functional Theory Methods

on

Biochromophores.

J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2020,

16,

587–600, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.9b00823.

(51) Meirzadeh, E.; Weissbuch,

I.;

Ehre, D.;

Lahav, M.;

Lubomirsky,

I.

Polar

Imperfections

in Amino Acid Crystals:

Design,

Structure,

and

Emerging Functionalities. Acc. Chem. Res. 2018,

51,

1238–1248, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.accounts.8b00054.

(52) Kurashvili, M.; Polishchuk, I.; Lang, A.; Strohmair, S.; Richter, A. F.; Rieger, S.;

Debnath, T.; Pokroy, B.; Feldmann, J. Disorder and Confinement Effects to Tune the

Optical Properties of Amino Acid Doped Cu2O Crystals. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2022,

32, 2202121, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202202121.

(53) Feh´er, P. P.; Madar´asz, A.; Stirling, A. Multiscale Modeling of Electronic Spectra

Including Nuclear Quantum Effects. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2021, 17, 6340–6352,

DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.1c00531.

(54) Sappati, S.; Hassanali, A.; Gebauer, R.; Ghosh, P. Nuclear quantum effects in a

HIV/cancer inhibitor: The case of ellipticine. J. Chem. Phys. 2016, 145, 205102,

DOI: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4968046.

47

(55) Law, Y. K.; Hassanali, A. A. The importance of nuclear quantum effects in spectral line

broadening of optical spectra and electrostatic properties in aromatic chromophores.

J. Chem. Phys. 2017, 148, 102331, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5005056.

(56) D´ıaz Mir´on, G.; Lien-Medrano, C. R.; Banerjee, D.; Morzan, U. N.; Sentef, M. A.;

Gebauer, R.; Hassanali, A. Exploring the Mechanisms behind Non-aromatic Fluores-

cence with the Density Functional Tight Binding Method. J. Chem. Theory Comput.

2024, 20, 3864–3878, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.4c00125.

(57) Joseph, S. K.; Kuritz, N.; Yahel, E.; Lapshina, N.; Rosenman, G.; Natan, A. Proton-

Transfer-Induced Fluorescence in Self-Assembled Short Peptides. J. Phys. Chem. A

2019, 123, 1758–1765, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.8b09183.

(58) Balasco, N.; Altamura, D.; Scognamiglio, P. L.; Sibillano, T.; Giannini, C.; Morelli, G.;

Vitagliano, L.; Accardo, A.; Diaferia, C. Self-Assembled Materials Based on Fully Aro-

matic Peptides: The Impact of Tryptophan, Tyrosine, and Dopa Residues. Langmuir

2024, 40, 1470–1486, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.langmuir.3c03214.

(59) Manju, S.; Sreenivasan, K. Conjugation of curcumin onto hyaluronic acid enhances its

aqueous solubility and stability. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2011, 359, 318–325, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2011.03.071.

(60) Case, D. A.; Cheatham III, T. E.; Darden, T.; Gohlke, H.; Luo, R.;

Merz Jr, K. M.; Onufriev, A.; Simmerling, C.; Wang, B.; Woods, R. J. The Am-

ber biomolecular simulation programs. J. Comput. Chem. 2005, 26, 1668–1688, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1002/jcc.20290.

(61) Case, D. A. et al. AmberTools. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2023, 63, 6183–6191, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.3c01153.

(62) Wang, J.; Wolf, R. M.; Caldwell, J. W.; Kollman, P. A.; Case, D. A. Development and

48

testing of a general amber force field. J. Comput. Chem. 2004, 25, 1157–1174, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1002/jcc.20035.

(63) Izaguirre, J. A.; Catarello, D. P.; Wozniak, J. M.; Skeel, R. D. Langevin sta-

bilization of molecular dynamics. J. Chem. Phys. 2001, 114, 2090–2098, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1332996.

(64) Warshel, A.; Levitt, M. Theoretical studies of enzymic reactions: dielectric, electro-

static and steric stabilization of the carbonium ion in the reaction of lysozyme. J. Mol.

Bio. 1976, 103, 227–249, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-2836(76)90311-9.

(65) Brunk, E.; Rothlisberger, U. Mixed quantum mechanical/molecular me-

chanical molecular dynamics

simulations

of biological

systems

in ground

and electronically excited states. Chem. Rev. 2015, 115, 6217–6263, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1021/cr500628b.

(66) Neese, F. The ORCA program system. WIREs Comput Mol Sci. 2012, 2, 73–78, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1002/wcms.81.

(67) Neese, F. Software update: the ORCA program system, version 4.0. WIREs Comput

Mol Sci. 2018, 8, e1327, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/wcms.1327.

(68) Neese, F.; Wennmohs, F.; Becker, U.; Riplinger, C. The ORCA quan-

tum chemistry

program package.

J. Chem. Phys.

2020,

152, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0004608.

(69) Neese, F. Software update: The ORCA program system–Version 5.0. WIREs Comput

Mol Sci. 2022, 12, e1606, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/wcms.1606.

(70) Neese, F. The SHARK integral generation and digestion system. J. Comput. Chem.

2023, 44, 381–396, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/jcc.26942.

49

(71) Yanai, T.; Tew, D. P.; Handy, N. C. A new hybrid exchange–correlation functional

using the Coulomb-attenuating method (CAM-B3LYP). Chem. Phys. Lett. 2004, 393,

51–57, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cplett.2004.06.011.

(72) Weigend, F.; Ahlrichs, R. Balanced basis sets of split valence, triple zeta valence and

quadruple zeta valence quality for H to Rn: Design and assessment of accuracy. Phys.

Chem. Chem. Phys. 2005, 7, 3297–3305, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/B508541A.

(73) Hellweg, A.; Rappoport, D. Development of new auxiliary basis functions of the Karl-

sruhe segmented contracted basis sets including diffuse basis functions (def2-SVPD,

def2-TZVPPD, and def2-QVPPD) for RI-MP2 and RI-CC calculations. Phys. Chem.

Chem. Phys. 2015, 17, 1010–1017, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/C4CP04286G.

(74) Neese, F.; Wennmohs, F.; Hansen, A.; Becker, U. Efficient, approximate and

parallel Hartree–Fock and hybrid DFT calculations. A ‘chain-of-spheres’ algo-

rithm for the Hartree–Fock exchange. Chem. Phys. 2009, 356, 98–109, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemphys.2008.10.036.

(75) Richter, M.; Marquetand, P.; Gonz´alez-V´azquez, J.; Sola, I.; Gonz´alez, L. SHARC:

ab initio molecular dynamics with surface hopping in the adiabatic representation

including arbitrary couplings. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2011, 7, 1253–1258, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1021/ct1007394.

(76) Mai, S.; Marquetand, P.; Gonz´alez, L. Nonadiabatic dynamics:

The

SHARC approach. WIREs Comput Mol

Sci.

2018,

8,

e1370, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1002/wcms.1370.

(77) Tully, J. C. Molecular dynamics with electronic transitions. J. Chem. Phys. 1990, 93,

1061–1071, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.459170.

(78) Barbatti, M. Nonadiabatic dynamics with trajectory surface hopping method. WIREs

Comput. Mol. Sci. 2011, 1, 620–633, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/wcms.64.

50

(79) Malhado, J. P.; Bearpark, M. J.; Hynes, J. T. Non-adiabatic dynamics close to conical

intersections and the surface hopping perspective. Front. Chem. 2014, 2, 97, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.3389/fchem.2014.00097.

(80) Persico, M.; Granucci, G. An overview of nonadiabatic dynamics simulations methods,

with focus on the direct approach versus the fitting of potential energy surfaces. Theo.

Chem. Acc. 2014, 133, 1–28, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00214-014-1526-1.

(81) Crespo-Otero, R.; Barbatti, M. Recent advances and perspectives on nonadia-

batic mixed quantum–classical dynamics. Chem. Rev. 2018, 118, 7026–7068, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.7b00577.

(82) Verlet, L. Computer “experiments” on classical fluids.

I. Thermodynami-

cal properties of Lennard-Jones molecules. Phys. Rev. 1967, 159, 98, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.159.98.

(83) Swope, W. C.; Andersen, H. C.; Berens, P. H.; Wilson, K. R. A computer simula-

tion method for the calculation of equilibrium constants for the formation of physical

clusters of molecules: Application to small water clusters. J. Chem. Phys. 1982, 76,

637–649, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.442716.

(84) Casida, M. E. Recent Advances In Density Functional Methods: (Part I); World Sci-

entific, 1995; pp 155–192, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1142/2914.

(85) Hirata, S.; Head-Gordon, M. Time-dependent density functional theory within

the Tamm–Dancoff approximation. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1999, 314, 291–299, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1016/S0009-2614(99)01149-5.

(86) Cordova, F.; Doriol, L. J.; Ipatov, A.; Casida, M. E.; Filippi, C.; Vela, A. Troubleshoot-

ing time-dependent density-functional theory for photochemical applications: Oxirane.

J. Chem. Phys 2007, 127, 164111, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2786997.

51

(87) Tapavicza, E.; Tavernelli,

I.; Rothlisberger, U.; Filippi, C.; Casida, M. E.

Mixed time-dependent density-functional theory/classical trajectory surface hop-

ping study of oxirane photochemistry. J. Chem. Phys. 2008, 129, 124108, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2978380.

(88) Peach, M. J. G.; Tozer, D. J. Overcoming Low Orbital Overlap and Triplet In-

stability Problems in TDDFT. J. Phys. Chem. A 2012, 116, 9783–9789, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1021/jp308662x.

(89) Hammes-Schiffer, S.; Tully, J. C. Proton transfer in solution: Molecular dy-

namics with quantum transitions. J. Chem. Phys. 1994, 101, 4657–4667, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1063/1.467455.

(90) Granucci, G.; Persico, M. Critical appraisal of the fewest switches algorithm for surface

hopping. J. Chem. Phys. 2007, 126, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2715585.

(91) Plasser, F.; Crespo-Otero, R.; Pederzoli, M.; Pittner, J.; Lischka, H.; Bar-

batti, M. Surface hopping dynamics with correlated single-reference methods: 9H-

adenine as a case study. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2014, 10, 1395–1405, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1021/ct4011079.

(92) Wen, J.; Mai, S.; Gonz´alez, L. Excited-state dynamics simulations of a light-

driven molecular motor in solution. J. Phys. Chem. A 2023, 127, 9520–9529, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.3c05841.

(93) Ibele, L. M.; Sanchez-Murcia, P. A.; Mai, S.; Nogueira, J. J.; Gonz´alez, L. Excimer

intermediates en route to long-lived charge-transfer states in single-stranded adenine

DNA as revealed by nonadiabatic dynamics. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2020, 11, 7483–

7488, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.0c02193.

(94) Mai, S.; Avagliano, D.; Heindl, M.; Marquetand, P.; Menger, M. F. S. J.; Op-

pel, M.; Plasser, F.; Polonius, S.; Ruckenbauer, M.; Shu, Y.; Truhlar, D. G.;

52

Zhang, L.; Zobel, P.; Gonz´alez, L. SHARC3.0: Surface Hopping Including Arbi-

trary Couplings – Program Package for Non-Adiabatic Dynamics. Zenodo, 2023;

https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7828641.

(95) Rackers, J. A.; Wang, Z.; Lu, C.; Laury, M. L.; Lagard`ere, L.; Schnieders, M. J.;

Piquemal, J.-P.; Ren, P.; Ponder, J. W. Tinker 8:

Software Tools

for

Molecular Design. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2018,

14,

5273–5289, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.8b00529.

(96) Chiariello, M. G.; Donati, G.; Raucci, U.; Perrella, F.; Rega, N. Structural Origin

and Vibrational Fingerprints of the Ultrafast Excited State Proton Transfer of the

Pyranine-Acetate Complex in Aqueous Solution. J. Phys. Chem. B 2021, 125, 10273–

10281, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcb.1c05590.

(97) Zhong, J.; Reinhardt, C. R.; Hammes-Schiffer, S. Role of Water in Proton-Coupled

Electron Transfer between Tyrosine and Cysteine in Ribonucleotide Reductase. J. Am.

Chem. Soc. 2022, 144, 7208–7214, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.1c13455.

(98) Gour, N.; Gazit, E. Metabolite assemblies: A surprising extension to the

amyloid hypothesis. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol 2021,

64,

154–164, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbpa.2021.07.005.

(99) Diaferia, C.; Gianolio, E.; Palladino, P.; Arena, F.; Boffa, C.; Morelli, G.; Ac-

cardo, A. Peptide materials obtained by aggregation of polyphenylalanine conjugates

as gadolinium-based magnetic resonance imaging contrast agents. Adv. Funct. Mater.

2015, 25, 7003–7016, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201502458.

(100) Vaccaro, M.; Mangiapia, G.; Paduano, L.; Gianolio, E.; Accardo, A.;

Tesauro, D.; Morelli, G. Structural and Relaxometric Characterization of

Peptide Aggregates Containing Gadolinium Complexes

as Potential Selec-

53

tive Contrast Agents

in MRI. ChemPhysChem 2007, 8, 2526–2538, DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1002/cphc.200700505.

(101) Diaferia, C.; Sibillano, T.; Balasco, N.; Giannini, C.; Roviello, V.; Vitagliano, L.;

Morelli, G.; Accardo, A. Hierarchical Analysis of Self-Assembled PEGylated

Hexaphenylalanine Photoluminescent Nanostructures. Chem. Eur. J. 2016, 22,

16586–16597, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/chem.201604107.

54

TOC Graphic

55

pH14710HClH2SO4DarkFluorescentOOH+H3NNH3+OO-+H3NNH3+OO-+H3NNH2

# 