# Abstract

 Self-assembly of polymers at liquid interfaces using non-covalent interactions has emerged as

 a

promising

technique

to

reversibly

produce

self-healing

membranes.

Besides

the

assembly

 process, it is also crucial to control the mechanical properties of these membranes. Here, we

 measure

the

interfacial

rheological

properties

of

PMAA-PPO

(polymethacrylic

acid

-

 polypropylene

oxide)

polymer

membranes

assembled

using

hydrogen

bonds

at

liquid-oil

 interfaces. Varying the pH enables us to modify the degree of ionization of the PMAA chains,

 and hence their ability to establish hydrogen interactions with PPO. Frequency sweeps of the

 interfacial layers show a crossover between a viscous regime at low frequencies and an elastic

 regime at high frequencies. The crossover elastic modulus decreases by half after one hour of

 the experiment over the pH range investigated, which can be accounted for by a decrease of

 the layer thickness as pH increases. Furthermore we find that the crossover frequency varies

 exponentially with the degree of ionization of PMAA. To account for these observations, we

 propose

a

simple

picture

where

the

short

PPO

chains

behave

as

non-covalent

cross-linkers

 that bridge several PMAA chains. The dissociation rate and hence the crossover frequency are

 controlled by the number of PO units per PPO chain involved in the hydrogen bonds.

 1

# Introduction

 Assembling polymer chains at liquid interfaces has emerged as an easy method to obtain self-

healing

and reconfigurable membranes

for applications in

encapsulation or biomedicine [1].

 To

obtain

interfacial

membranes,

one

can

use

non-covalent

interactions

between

two

 polymers located in two immiscible liquid phases [2-9], between a polymer and a surfactant

 [10-14], or between a polymer and nanoparticles [15-17]. One can also trigger the assembly

 of a membrane at the interface between two aqueous solutions such as in alginate

- calcium

 systems

where

divalent

calcium

ions

bridge

biopolymer

molecules

[18-19].

Interfacial

 polymer

membranes

have

also

been

formed

at

the

interface

of

two

immiscible

polymer

 solutions

in

a

case

where

the

continuous

phase

is

water,

such

as

in

phase

separating

PEG-

Dextran solutions known as water-water interfaces [3, 4, 6]. In the latter case, the interactions

 used

to

obtain

an

interfacial

membrane

were

mainly

electrostatic

[2-7,

9-19]

but

hydrogen

 bonds have also been employed in the same context [8, 20, 21]. To understand the growth of

 such interfacially-assembled membranes, the membrane thickness evolution as a function of

time was measured by several

groups. They reported either a ~ t1/2 growth [8, 11, 20] or an

exponential

growth

with

time

[14].

In

the

case

where

a

~

t1/2

growth

was

observed,

the

 assembly process is controlled by the diffusion of one of the species through the membrane.

 We have suggested in previous studies that the growth of PMAA and PPO (polymethacrylic

 acid

and

polypropylene

oxide)

membranes

using

hydrogen

bonds

is

controlled

by

the

 diffusion of PPO chains through the growing membrane and that the diffusion coefficient of

 the

PPO

chains

decreases

with

the

PPO

concentration

as

the

PPO

chains

have

to

stretch

in

 order to diffuse through the crowded membrane [20]. More recently, we demonstrated that pH

 controls

membrane

growth

as

it

determines

the

PMAA

ionization

degree

and

the

 concentration of counterions, and hence the number of hydrogen bonds, the gel composition,

 and the adsorption

rate

of

charged PMAA chains at

the

membrane surface

[21].

Looking

at

 the

assembly

process

at

early

times

for

a

mixture

of

chitosan

and

an

oppositely-charged

 surfactant, using light scattering, de Loubens et al. showed the formation of aggregates whose

 number grows over time and who finally form a percolated network at the interface [22]. The

 formation

of

the

network

was

confirmed

by

the

same

authors

using

interfacial

rheological

 measurements. In fact, controlling the mechanical properties of such membranes is crucial as

 these properties control their resistance to shear or elongation when transported and deformed

 in a flow [23, 24].



2



 In this article, we investigate the interfacial rheology of PMAA-PPO layers as a function of

 pH, and hence the degree of ionization of PMAA chains. We find that the elastic interfacial

 modulus of the interfacial layer can be decreased by a factor two by increasing the pH from 3

 to 5 and that this effect can be accounted for by a simple variation of thickness of the layers.

 Furthermore

the

crossover

frequency

of

the

G’

and

G’’

frequency

curves

increases

 exponentially with the degree of ionization. To account for these results, we propose a simple

 picture

where

the

PMAA

chains

are

bridged

by

PPO

chains

and

where

the

crossover

 frequency is controlled by the probability of PPO chains to detach all the hydrogen bonds that

 they establish with PMAA chains.

 Materials and methods

 A schematic of the system is shown in Figure 1.

Aqueous PMAA solutions are prepared by

dissolving 1 wt% of poly(methacrylic acid) (molar mass: 100000 gmol−1) (Polysciences, Inc.)

 in

water

distilled

and

purified

with

a

milli-Q

apparatus

(Millipore).

The

molar

mass

of

a

repeat

MAA

unit

is

87.1

gmol−1,

which

acorresponds

to

a

molar

concentration

of

 0.11 molL−1. The pH is adjusted by adding either a 0.1 M HCl solution (Sigma-Aldrich)

 or a

 0.1

M

NaOH

solution

(Sigma-Aldrich)



and

is

measured

with

a

pH-meter

(pHM

250

ion

 analyser Meterlab, Radiometer Copenhagen) with a precision of 0.05 pH units. Oil-based PPO

 solutions are prepared by dissolution of 1 wt% of poly(propylene oxide) (molar mass: 4000

gmol−1)

(Sigma-Aldrich)

in

Mygliol

812

N

(IMCD

France/Sasol).

Miglyol

is

a

neutral

oil

 consisting of caprylic/capric triglyceride (C8/C10 chains). The molar mass of a PO repeat unit

is

58.1

gmol−1,

which

corresponds

to

a

molar

concentration

of

0.15

molL−1.

We

choose

1

 wt%

for

both

polymers

to

ensure

an

excess

of

polymer

in

bulk

phases

with

respect

to

the

 interface,

while

being

in

the

dilute

regime

(<3

wt%)

to

have

a

low

viscosity

solution,

thus

 improving sensitivity to interfacial rheology measurements.

 The potentiometric measurements were performed using a digital pH meter (pH M

 250

ion

analyzer,

Meterlab,

Radiometer

Copenhagen)

with

a

combined

glass-calomel

 electrode.

The

electrode

system

was

daily

calibrated

using

three

buffers

(pH

4,

7

and

10).



Potentiometric titrations were carried out with a sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solution (0.2 M),

according to the PMAA concentration (0.1 molL−1). The measurements were made at 25°C,

 with constant stirring. pH values were recorded after sufficient stabilization. The dependence

 3





 of the PMAA ionization degree on pH was determined by using the potentiometric titration

 data, as:

 where cNaOH and cH+ are the molarities of added NaOH and free hydrogen ions, respectively,

 and

cMAA

is

the

molarity

of

monomer

units

(as

each

monomer

unit

bears

one

carboxylic

 group) [21]. The ionization degree defined above takes into account the fact that the molarity

 of hydroxide ions is very low for the cases of weak and moderate polymer ionization. = 1

 corresponds to complete ionization.



The membrane thickness

was measured

in

situ using an optical

spectrometer V8E (Specim)

 assembled

on

an

optical

microscope

(Olympus),

with

the

focus

strictly

set

at

the

interface

 where

the

membrane

grows.

The

thickness

was

also

measured

ex

situ

using

an

optical

 profilometer (Microsurf 3D, Fogale nanotech) by transferring the membrane from the liquid

 to a glass slide.

 Emulsions were prepared in vials by gently pouring 6 mL of water-based solution and then 4

 mL of oil-based solution.



To probe the interfacial rheometry, an AR-G2 rheometer (TA Instruments) is used with a

 Double-Wall-Ring geometry. The torque measurement resolution is 1 nN.m. The ring-shaped

 container is half-filled with approximately 21 mL of PMAA water solution until obtaining a

 flat

interface

pinned

horizontally

between

the

edges

of

the

walls,

so

that

meniscus

 deformation

can

be

neglected.

Then,

the

ring

is

carefully

brought

close

to

the

interface

and

 precisely

positioned

precisely

to

maintain

a

flat

interface

between

the

wall

corner

and

the

 diamond-shaped corner of the ring. Finally, the rest of the container is slowly filled with the

 same volume of

PPO solution

in

Miglyol. Measurements are

controlled by TRIOS

software

 (TA

Instruments).

A

strain

rate

of

0.1%

is

imposed

to

ensure

that

all

measurements

are



carried out in the linear regime. The presented measurements are all obtained one hour after

 the ring is deposited at the interface.

 4











































































































a

 b.

 c.



Figure 1. a. Schematic drawing of the interfacial assembly of PPO and PMAA polymer chains at the

 Miglyol water interface. b. PPO repeat unit. c. PMAA repeat unit.

 Results and discussion

 As the pH increases from 3 to 5.1, the ionization degree of PMAA increases from 2 to

 10%

(inset

in

Figure

2).

Hence,

we

expect

that

the

ability

of

PMAA

chains

to

establish

 hydrogen bonds with the PPO chains decreases with the pH, as recently shown [21]. Indeed,

 5



HOOCH3nOCH3n





















































































we

observe

that

the

thickness

of

the

PMAA-PPO

interfacial

layer

measured

after

one

hour

 drops

by

almost

a

factor

of

2,

from

360

nm

to

150

nm

when

the

pH

exceeds

4.5,

which

 corresponds to an ionization degree  = 8%.



Figure

2



a.

Degree

of

ionization of

PMAA

as

a

function

of

pH.

b.

Thickness

of

the

PPO-PMAA

 interfacial

layer

at

the

water-Miglyol

interface

after

one

hour

as

a

function

of

pH.

The

PPO

and

 PMAA are at 1 wt% in miglyol and water respectively.



Turning to

the interfacial

rheological

properties,

we report in

Figure 3

the

frequency

 sweeps of the storage and loss interfacial shear moduli G’ and G’’, measured at the interface

 between the PMAA and the PPO solution one hour after the establishment of contact between

the

two

solutions.

For

a

frequency

of

0.01

rad.s-1,

G՛

 and

G՛ ՛

 vary

over

3

orders

of

 magnitude

for

a

pH

ranging

between

3

and

5

and

are

not

even

measurable

for

pH

=

5.5

 suggesting

a

value

at

least

two

orders

of

magnitude

lower.

At

pH

=

3,

corresponding

to

a

 degree of ionization of

PMAA chains

of



= 2

%

the layer exhibits

a viscoelastic behavior

with a crossover angular frequency

c = 0.08 rads-1. For < c, G՛ < G՛ ՛ , meaning that

 the

layer

presents

a

fluid

behavior.

For

>c,

G՛ >

G՛ ՛

 and

G՛

 becomes

almost

 independent

of

frequency

indicating

that

the

layer

presents

an

elastic

behavior.

As

non-

covalent

hydrogen

bonds

between

the

PMAA

and

PPO

chains

control

the

rheology

in

the

 interfacial

layer, it

is expected that these interactions present

a finite life

time controlled by

 6











 rates of association and dissociation. When the deformation frequency exceeds the frequency

 associated

with

the

time

required

for

bound

groups

to

dissociate,

it

is

expected

that

these

 hydrogen bonds will behave as crosslinks between the polymer chains and provide an elastic

 resistance to the deformation.

In contrast, when the deformation frequency is lower than the

 frequency

associated

with

the

typical

life

time

of

these

bonds,

the

layers

are

expected

to

 present a viscous behavior consistently with what we observe.

 When the pH is increased to pH = 4.5 corresponding to a degree of ionization of  = 8 %

the

 rheological

curves

G՛ (

and

G՛ ՛ (

are

shifted

to

higher

frequencies,

meaning

that

the

 fluid-like behavior is observed over a larger range of frequencies.



7







 Figure

3.

Frequency

sweeps

of

the

PPO-PMAA

interfacial

layers

as

a

function

of

pH.

The

 measurements

are

made

for

PPO

and

PMAA

solutions

in

Miglyol

respectively

at

1

wt%.

The

 measurements are performed one hour after the two solutions are put into contact. The deformation

 amplitude is 0.1 %. The opensymbols represent G՛ ՛

and filledsymbols represent

G՛ .

 At pH = 5.1, G՛ ( and G՛ ՛ ( remain parallel over four decades of frequency and G՛ ~

 G՛ ՛ ~

0.7.

Such

behavior

may

be

interpreted

as

a

result

of

percolation

of

the

gelled

 membrane, where there are just enough hydrogen bonds to form a weak viscoelastic network.

 Indeed, at a slightly higher pH (pH = 5.5), the rheological response becomes weak and purely

 viscous,

i.e.

G՛ ՛

 >

G՛ .

At

this

pH,

we

experimentally

do

not

detect

any

interfacial

 membrane,

indicating

that

the

polymers

do

not

assemble

into

a

membrane.

The

signal

 measured

by

the

interfacial

rheometer

is

therefore

only

caused

by

the

drag

provided

by

the

 two bulk water and miglyol phases over the oscillating ring.

 In

order

to

gain

further

insight

into

the

influence

of

pH

on

the

interfacial

rheology

of

the

 PMAA-PPO layers, we have reported in Figure 4a the values of the interfacial elastic modulus





at the crossover point as a function of pH. At pH = 3 and pH = 4.5 , we measure a value of

 the

crossover

elastic

modulus

of



















 .









decreases

to













as

the

pH

is

 increased above pH=4.9.

 To eliminate the potential influence of the layer thickness on the measured values of





 , we

 renormalize the interfacial modulus values by the layer thickness, h, as reported in Figure 2,

 to obtain the values of the elastic modulus, i.e.









 .





 has the unit of a stress (Pa)

 and

should

therefore

represent

the

bulk

shear

elastic

modulus

of

the

membrane.

For



pH

 values

up

to

4.9

the

values

of









 remain

nearly

constant

around

5

MPa.

When

the

pH

 increases to 5.1 a two fold decrease of the bulk shear modulus of the membrane is obtained.

 These results show that the decrease of the interfacial elastic modulus







observed for pH =

 4.7 and 4.9 is mostly due to the reduction in the membrane thickness and that the bulk shear

 modulus presents a limited dependence with the pH.



8

















 Figure

4.

a.

Values

of

the

crossover

interfacial

modulus

as

a

function

of

the

ionization

degree

of







obtained

by

rescaling

the

surface

crossover

modulus

by

the

 PMAA.

b.

Values

of



 thickness of the interfacial layer.



Figure 5. Crossover frequency of the rheology curves as a function of the degree of ionization

of PMAA. The line is a fit of the data with an exponential function:



















rads-1.

 9

















By contrast the pH has a much greater influence on the value of the crossover frequency, c.

 In

Figure

5,

it

can

be

seen

that c

increases

by

three

orders

of

magnitude

as

the

degree

of

 ionization

of

PMAA

rises

from

0.01

to

0.11

which

corresponds

to

a

pH

rise

from

3

to

5.1.

 More

precisely,

the

crossover

frequency

varies

exponentially

with

the

degree

of

ionization,

i.e.















 with k = 0.001 rads-1 and s = 69, as shown in Figure 5.



In

associative

polymer

networks,

the

cross

over

frequency

obtained

with

rheological

 measurements is often related to the dissociation time of the

reversible bonds [25-27] while

 the elastic modulus is related to the length or volume of the elastically active chains.



We can determine the volume of elastically active chains including both solvent and polymer

 as follows [28-30] :



where





 is the bulk shear elastic modulus at c.



 For















, we find















which is consistent with a very short elastically- active subchain involving only a few monomer units. This result indicates that there is a high

 density

of

hydrogen

bond

interactions

between

PPO

and

PMAA

chains

in

the

membrane

 which depends weakly on the pH.



To

account

for

the

exponential

variation

of

the

cross

over

frequency

with

the

pH

we

 hypothesize that the PPO chains behave as multifunctional reversible crosslinkers that bind to

 several PMAA chains through hydrogen bonds as schematized in Figure 6. With such picture

 the

cross

over

frequency

that

we

measure

is

related

to

the

probability

of

one

PPO

chain

to

 dissociate all its links with

several PMAA chains. Once this PPO chain has detached, it can

 relax and switch to another position. The PMAA units that were linked to this PPO chain can

 also relax.

 Assuming

that

the

experimentally

measured

crossover

frequency

is

related

to

the

time

 required for one PPO chains to detach all its links, we provide an estimation of the fraction of

 PPO

monomers

involved

in

hydrogen

interactions

with

PMAA

chains.

Let

us

assume

an

 Arrhenius-type dependance for the individual dissociation dynamics. As the PPO chains

are

 shorter than the PMAA chains, we assume that the dissociation dynamics is governed by the

 10















































































































probability of PPO chains to detach from PMAA chains.

Then, the rate of dissociation for a

 PPO chain reads:

 where

E

is

the

interaction

energy,

kB

the

Boltzman

constant,

T

is

the

temperature,

w0

is

a

 prefactor, Nc is the number of PPO monomers in one chain forming H-bonds with MAA monomers

 of a

given PMAA chain, s is the exponent of the exponential law defined earlier, and  is the

 interaction energy of a single hydrogen bond between one MAA unit and one PO unit. Based

 on these considerations, we deduce that:

 From Figure 5, we obtained s = 69. Assuming that   n kBT with n = 5 to 10 [31], we find



 meaning

that

10

to

20%

of

the

PO

monomers

in

a

chain

are

involved

in

hydrogen

 bonding with PMAA chains.



Figure

6.

Schematic

representation

of

the

network

between

PMAA

and

PPO

chains.

For

each

PPO

 chain several units are involved in hydrogen bonding which enable to bridge several PMAA chains

 Conclusion

 We have measured the interfacial shear rheological properties of interfacial layers assembled

 through

reversible

hydrogen

interactions

between

PPO

and

PMAA.

These

layers

exhibit

a

 viscoelastic behavior

which depends strongly on

pH.

Varying the pH

enables us to

tune the

 values

of

the

elastic

modulus

only

by

a

factor

two

while

the

crossover

frequency

increases

 exponentially with the degree of ionization of the PMAA chains. To describe our results, we

 propose a simple picture in which one PPO chain behaves as a multipoint crosslinker bridging

 11







































































































































































































several PMAA chains. With this picture, we deduce from our experimental results reasonable

 values for the number of PPO monomers involved in such interfacial layers.



Acknowledgements

 The authors acknowledge financial support from the Agence Nationale de la Recherche under

 Interpol

(ANR-12-JS08-0007),

EMetBrown

(ANR-21-ERCC-0010-01),

Softer

(ANR21-

CE06-0029),

and

Fricolas

(ANR-21-CE06-0039)

grants.



The

authors

thank

Julie

Brun

for

 performing

some

of

the

experiments.

They

also

acknowledge

financial

support

from

the

 European

Union

through

the

European

Research

Council

under

EMetBrown

(ERC-CoG-

 101039103) grant. Views and opinions expressed are however those of the authors only and

 do

not

necessarily

reflect

those

of

the

European

Union

or

the

European

Research

Council.

 Neither

the

European

Union

nor

the

granting

authority

can

be

held

responsible

for

them.

 Finally,

the

authors

thank

the

Soft

Matter

Collaborative

Research

Unit,

Frontier

Research

 Center

for

Advanced

Material

and

Life

Science,

Faculty

of

Advanced

Life

Science

at

 Hokkaido

University,

Sapporo,

Japan,

and

the

CNRS

International

Research

Network

 between

France

and

India

on

“Hydrodynamics

at

small

scales:

from

soft

matter

to

 bioengineering”.

 References

 Forth, J. et al. Building Reconfigurable Devices Using Complex Liquid–Fluid

 1.

Interfaces. Adv. Mater. 31, 1806370 (2019).

 Inostroza-Brito, K. E. et al. Co-assembly, spatiotemporal control and morphogenesis

 2.

of a hybrid protein–peptide system. Nat. Chem. 7, 897–904 (2015).

 Kim, M. et al. One-Step Generation of Multifunctional Polyelectrolyte Microcapsules

 3.

via Nanoscale Interfacial Complexation in Emulsion (NICE). ACS Nano 9, 8269–8278

(2015).

 Hann, S. D., Niepa, T. H. R., Stebe, K. J. & Lee, D. One-Step Generation of Cell-

4.

Encapsulating Compartments via Polyelectrolyte Complexation in an Aqueous Two Phase

System. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 8, 25603–25611 (2016).

 Monteillet, H., Kleijn, J. M., Sprakel, J. & Leermakers, F. A. M. Complex coacervates

 5.

formed across liquid interfaces: A self-consistent field analysis. Adv. Colloid Interface Sci.

239, 17–30 (2017).

 6. Kim, M., Doh, J. & Lee, D. pH-Induced Softening of Polyelectrolyte Microcapsules

without Apparent Swelling. ACS Macro Lett. 5, 487–492 (2016).

 12











 7. Monteillet, H., Hagemans, F. & Sprakel, J. Charge-driven co-assembly of polyelectrolytes

across oil–water interfaces. Soft Matter 9, 11270 (2013).

 8. Dupré de Baubigny, J. et al. One-Step Fabrication of pH-Responsive Membranes and

Microcapsules through Interfacial H-Bond Polymer Complexation. Sci. Rep. 7, 1265 (2017).

 9. Steinschulte, A. A. et al. Interface-enforced complexation between copolymer blocks. Soft

Matter 11, 3559–3565 (2015).

 10. Hann, S. D., Stebe, K. J. & Lee, D. AWE-somes: All Water Emulsion Bodies with

Permeable Shells and Selective Compartments. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9, 25023–25028

(2017).

 11.

Capito, R. M., Azevedo, H. S., Velichko, Y. S., Mata, A. & Stupp, S. I. Self-Assembly

of Large and Small Molecules into Hierarchically Ordered Sacs and Membranes. Science 319,

1812–1816 (2008).

 Gunes, D. Z., Pouzot, M., Rouvet, M., Ulrich, S. & Mezzenga, R. Tuneable thickness

 12.

barriers for composite o/w and w/o capsules, films, and their decoration with particles. Soft

Matter 7, 9206 (2011).

 Xie, K. et al. Interfacial rheological properties of self-assembling biopolymer

 13.

microcapsules. Soft Matter 13, 6208–6217 (2017).

 14. Mendoza-Meinhardt, A., Botto, L. & Mata, A. A fluidic device for the controlled

formation and real-time monitoring of soft membranes self-assembled at liquid interfaces. Sci.

Rep. 8, 2900 (2018).

 Xu, R. et al. Interfacial Assembly and Jamming of Polyelectrolyte Surfactants: A

 15.

Simple Route To Print Liquids in Low-Viscosity Solution. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12,

18116–18122 (2020).

 16. Kaufman, G. et al. Soft microcapsules with highly plastic shells formed by interfacial

polyelectrolyte–nanoparticle complexation. Soft Matter 11, 7478–7482 (2015).

 17. Kaufman, G. et al. Single-step microfluidic fabrication of soft monodisperse

polyelectrolyte microcapsules by interfacial complexation. Lab Chip 14, 3494–3497 (2014).

 18. Godefroid, J. et al., Surface Stress and shape relaxation in gelling droplets, Soft Matter,

19, 7787-7795 (2023)

 19.

Guilbert,

E.

et

al,

Spontaneous

Structuration

of

Biohydrogels

by

Membrane-Free

Osmosis, Adv. Funct. Mat., 34, 2400888 (2024)

 20. Dupré de

Baubigny,

et

al Growth mechanisms

of polymer membranes by H-Bonding at

immiscible liquid interfaces, ACS MacroLetters, 10 204−209 (2021)

 21. Govorun, E., et al., Growth of membranes formed by associating polymers at interfaces,

Soft Matter, 20, 6822 (2024)

 22.

Chachanidze,R.

et

al.

Structural

characterization

of

the

interfacial

self-assembly

of

 chitosan with oppositely charged surfactant, J. Coll. Interf. Sci., 616, 911-920 (2022)

 13



 23. De Loubens, C., et al., Stretching of capsules in an elongation flow, a route to constitutive

 law. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 767, R3 (2015)

 24. Trégouët, C., et al., Microfluidic probing of the complex interfacial rheology of multilayer

 capsules. Soft matter, 15(13), 2782-2790 (2019)

 25.

Rubinstein,

M.,

&

Semenov,

A.

N.,

Dynamics

of

entangled

solutions

of

associating

 polymers. Macromolecules, 34(4), 1058-1068 (2001)

 26.

Leibler,

L.,

Rubinstein,

M.,

&

Colby,

R.

H.,

Dynamics

of

reversible

networks.

 Macromolecules, 24(16), 4701-4707 (1991)

 27. Spruijt, E., Sprakel, J., Lemmers, M., Stuart, M. A. C., & Van Der Gucht, J., Relaxation

 Dynamics

at

Different

Time

Scales

in

Electrostatic

Complexes:

Time-Salt

Superposition.

 Physical review letters, 105(20), 208301 (2010)

 28. Doi, Masao. Soft matter physics. oxford university press, 2013.

 29. Canal, T., & Peppas, N. A. (1989). Correlation between mesh size and equilibrium degree

 of swelling of polymeric networks. Journal of Biomedical Materials Research, 23(10),

1183–1193. https://doi.org/10.1002/jbm.820231007



30. Kleman, M., & Lavrentovich, O. D. (2003). Soft Matter Physics: An Introduction.

 Springer New York.

 31. Desiraju, G. R. (2002). Hydrogen bridges in crystal engineering: Interactions without

 borders. Accounts of Chemical Research, 35(7), 565–573.

 https://doi.org/10.1021/ar010054t

 14