# Abstract

Living cells exhibit a complex organization comprising numerous compartments,

among which are RNA- and protein-rich membraneless, liquid-like organelles known as

biomolecular condensates. Energy-consuming processes regulate their formation and

1













dissolution, with (de-)phosphorylation by speciﬁc enzymes being among the most com-

monly involved reactions. By employing a model system consisting of a phosphorylat-

able peptide and homopolymeric RNA, we elucidate how enzymatic activity modulates

the growth kinetics and alters the local structure of biomolecular condensates. Under

passive condition, time-resolved ultra-small-angle X-ray scattering with synchrotron

source reveals a nucleation-driven coalescence mechanism maintained over four decades

in time, similar to the coarsening of simple binary ﬂuid mixtures. Coarse-grained molec-

ular dynamics simulations show that peptide-decorated RNA chains assembled shortly

after mixing constitute the relevant subunits. In contrast, actively-formed condensates

initially display a local mass fractal structure, which gradually matures upon enzymatic

activity before condensates undergo coalescence. Both types of condensate eventually

reach a steady state but ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching indicates a peptide

diﬀusivity twice higher in actively-formed condensates consistently with their loosely-

packed local structure. We expect multiscale, integrative approaches implemented with

model systems to link eﬀectively the functional properties of membraneless organelles

to their formation and dissolution kinetics as regulated by cellular active processes.

# Introduction

Membraneless organelles are intracellular compartments devoid of lipid membrane, consist-

ing of multiple proteins and possibly nucleic acids (DNA and/or RNA), and formed by

liquid-liquid phase separation. 1–4 These biomolecular condensates perform essential biologi-

cal functions by sequestering speciﬁc factors and promoting biochemical reactions following

the needs of the cell. 5 They also serve as protocells for the study of the emergence of func-

tional cellular life or as catalytic microcompartments. 6,7 Many condensates found in eucary-

otic cells contain RNA and are involved in gene expression, such as nucleoli, 8 P granules, 9

stress granules 10 or Cajal bodies 11 to name a few. Protein-RNA condensates may also play

a role in pathological processes, 12 for example by facilitating the transcription of viral RNA

2

during SARS-Cov-2 replication. 13 Membraneless organelles are relatively short-lived, in that

they are formed to perform speciﬁc functions and are dissolved after these tasks are com-

pleted. Such a ﬂexibility is maintained through energy-consuming enzymatic processes. In

particular, various post-translational modiﬁcations have been shown to regulate intracellular

phase separation, including phosphorylation, 14 methylation, 15 acetylation and combinations

thereof. 16

Phase separation is a generic phenomenon by which a homogeneous material, sponta-

neously or not, separates into two or more distinct domains (phases) with diﬀerent phys-

ical and/or chemical properties. Extensive experimental and theoretical eﬀorts have been

devoted to elucidating the phase-separation kinetics of binary systems, 17 including ﬂuid

mixtures relevant to biomolecular condensates, under both passive (spontaneous) and active

(chemically driven) conditions. 18–20 A major limitation in these investigations lies in the lack

of information across length and time scales spanning several orders of magnitude. Indeed,

biomolecular condensates are mostly micrometer-sized and therefore, ﬂuorescence microscopy

has become the standard technique to monitor their life cycle, especially within cells. 8 Quite

recently, holographic microscopy has demonstrated its ability to monitor the growth of PopZ-

cation condensates without the need for protein labeling. 21 In all cases, submicrometer-sized

condensates formed along the growth pathway are overlooked, and events occurring on sub-

second time scales often remain inaccessible. Conversely, coarse-grained molecular dynamics

simulations can provide a wealth of information at the molecular level, 22 and a few phase-

separated protein-RNA condensates have been elucidated. 23,24 Nonetheless, coarse-grained

models face substantial challenges in quantitatively reproducing the thermodynamic proper-

ties of biomolecular condensates. In addition, although they allow the simulation of relatively

large supramolecular systems, the accessible time scales remain limited to a few microseconds

at most.

To bridge these multiple scales, time-resolved small-angle X-ray scattering (TR-SAXS)

using synchrotron source has emerged as a state-of-the-art technique, enabling to track self-

3

assembly processes with millisecond temporal resolution and spatial sensitivity ranging from

a few to several hundred nanometers. 25–29 Within the context of liquid-liquid phase sepa-

ration, the assembly kinetics of a prion-like domain has revealed the existence of a double

nucleation barrier to overcome before the condensate growth can proceed. 30 With the advent

of ultra-small angles available at a very few synchrotron facilities worldwide, time-resolved

ultra-small-angle X-ray scattering (TR-USAXS) 31 has extended the capabilities of X-ray

scattering to the micrometer scale, and the spinodal decomposition of bovine serum albumin

induced by YCl3 was probed during the ﬁrst two minutes following the mixing of compo-

nents. 32 Likewise, coacervates composed of oppositely-charged polyelectrolytes were found

to change from mass fractal to surface fractal morphologies while growing by coalescence. 33

Nevertheless, how enzymatic activity regulates the growth mechanism, the local structure,

and the morphology of biomolecular condensates – compared to conditions lacking active

processes – remains experimentally unaddressed.

To ﬁll this knowledge gap, we employ a model system of biomolecular condensates whose

formation is triggered by the dephosphorylation of serine residues, thereby mimicking the

enzymatic regulation encountered in intracellular membraneless organelles. 34 This system

consists of an arginine-rich peptide (RRASLRRASL) containing phosphorylatable serines,

associated with poly(uridylic acid) (polyU) RNA. Condensates form spontaneously when the

serines bear positive charges – a condition hereafter referred to as passive – or are enzymati-

cally induced by lambda phosphatase (LPP), which removes phosphate groups from initially

phosphorylated serines, deﬁning the active condition. This ﬂexible system enables the com-

parison between condensate formation mechanisms under passive and active conditions. We

therefore combine TR-USAXS experiments performed at varying peptide and enzyme con-

centrations with confocal microscopy and coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations to

capture these mechanisms across a wide range of length and time scales.

4

Results

Phase separation occurs in the cationic regime

Upon mixing RRASLRRASL peptide with anionic polyU RNA (Fig. 1a) in 4 mM MgCl2,

2.25 mM ATP, 1.6 mM dithiothreitol, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4 at 37 °C, biomolecular conden-

sates in the form of liquid-like droplets are spontaneously made by coacervation. 34 A direct

evidence for the presence of micrometer-sized droplets is given by the turbid aspect of the

solution (Fig. 1b). Confocal microscopy images performed with 0.5% of ﬂuorescent TAMRA-

peptide conﬁrm the spherical shape and the micrometer-scaled diameter of the condensates

(Fig. 1c). At a given RNA concentration, turbidity measurements display a clear peptide

threshold (saturation) concentration (Fig. 1d), which is characteristic of phase separation.

It is worth noting that the phase boundary is almost superimposed with the electroneutral-

ity line. In other words, phase separation occurs in the cationic regime, when the positive

charges supplied by peptides outnumber the negative charges carried by RNA.

The SAXS measurement of peptides reveals no sign of aggregation (Fig. ??) since the

scattering curve at low q-values – q being the wavenumber – is ﬂat. Furthermore, the mea-

sured radius of gyration (0.9 nm) is consistent with the small number of amino acids (10).

Similarly, the scattering curve of phosphorylated peptides reveals a radius of gyration of

0.84 nm (Fig. ??). PolyU RNA has 250 ± 80 (s.d.) nucleotides according to mass pho-

tometry (Fig. ??) and the radius of gyration is estimated to be 11.6 nm (Fig. ??). The

Kratky representation of the RNA scattering curve displays an increase of the normalized

intensity (qRg)2(I/I0) – where Rg is the radius of gyration, I the scattering intensity, and

I0 the forward scattering intensity – increases with qRg. This indicates a stretched confor-

mation compared with a gaussian chain that will exhibit a ﬂat Kratky representation – or

alternatively, I ∼ q−2 –, as expected for a fully charged polyelectrolyte.

5

Figure 1: (a) Schematic representation of RRASLRRASL peptide (red) and polyU RNA (blue) forming condensates upon coulombic interaction. (b) A solution of condensates in a quartz cuvette exhibits a high level of turbidity. (c) Confocal microscopy image of conden- sates obtained with 1,000 µM of peptide including 0.5% of TAMRA-peptide, and 0.5 g.L-1 of RNA. (d) Contour map of turbidity measured at 500 nm as a function of the peptide and RNA concentrations. The red dashed line indicates electroneutrality.

Passively-formed condensates grow by nucleated Brownian motion-

induced coalescence

Due to the coulombic interactions underlying coacervation, growth is expected to start as

early as a few milliseconds following the mixing of components, spanning length scales from

several tens of nanometers to a few micrometers. Accordingly, TR-USAXS experiments on

synchrotron source are carried out with a very large sample-to-detector distance of 31 m, and

the rapid mixing is performed with a stopped-ﬂow device that enables a dead time down to

6

2.5 ms. Figure 2a depicts scattering curves measured at diﬀerent times for a peptide concen-

tration of 1,000 µM (see Fig. ?? for other peptide concentrations). The coacervation begins

immediately after mixing and the remarkably ﬂat Guinier region at low q-values is charac-

teristic of the absence of interaction between condensates. Note that these measurements

are repeatable from the ﬁrst milliseconds up to nearly 10 min (Fig. ??).

Since confocal microscopy clearly indicates a spherical morphology for all the condensates

(Fig. 1c), we ﬁt each scattering curve with a model of polydisperse spheres expressed as:

I(t, q) ∼

+∞

sin(qR) − qR cos(qR) (qR)3

3

(cid:20)

(cid:21)

2

Z

0

p(R; ïR(t)ð, ∆R(t))R6dR

(1)

where R is the condensate radius and p(R; ïRð, ∆R) the size distribution assumed here to be

lognormal with mean radius ïRð and width ∆R, both varying with time. Figure 2b shows the

time evolution of ïRð inferred from the scattering curves at various peptide concentrations.

Strikingly, the mean radius obeys a scaling law of the form ïRð = (Kt)1/3 – where K is a

dynamic prefactor –, as early as the ﬁrst few tens of milliseconds and this behavior persists

over nearly four decades in time for the highest peptide concentrations. An exponent of 1/3

during liquid-liquid phase separation is characteristic of either: 17,19 (i) diﬀusion-limited Ost-

wald ripening where condensate-forming molecules migrate from small condensates to large

condensates; or (ii) Brownian motion-induced coalescence during which condensates fuse to

form increasingly larger condensates. In the latter case, the dynamic prefactor is expressed

as K ≃ 6kBT φ/5πη, with kB the Botzmann constant, T the temperature, φ the condensate

volume fraction, and η the solvent viscosity. 19 Whereas K depends on the condensate volume

fraction for the coalescence mechanism, it is only related to the properties of condensate-

forming molecules such as the molar volume and the saturation concentration in the case of

Ostwald ripening. The ratio of the measured dynamic prefactors for experiments performed

with peptide concentrations of 1,000 and 2,000 µM while maintaining the peptide-to-RNA

charge ratio constant, is estimated to be 1.6. Although a factor 2 is theoretically expected,

the fact that K increases with volume fraction suggests that coalescence mostly drives the

7

(a) Scattering curves at Figure 2: TR-USAXS measurements under passive conditions. diﬀerent times of a solution containing 1,000 µM of peptide and 0.5 g.L-1 of RNA. (b) Mean radius ïRð of condensates as a function of time for various peptide concentrations. The numbers in brackets are the peptide-to-RNA charge ratios. ïRð is estimated by ﬁtting the scattering curves with a model of lognormally-distributed spheres. The dashed line represents a scaling law in t1/3. (c) Arbitrarily scaled number density of condensates versus time at various peptide concentrations. The dashed line is a scaling law in t−1. The RNA concentration in (b) and (c) is 0.5 g.L-1 except for the highest peptide concentration of 2,000 µM where the RNA concentration is 1 g.L-1.

growth kinetics.

A quantity proportional to the number density of condensates N can be deduced from

the forward scattering intensity I0 ≡ I(q → 0) and the size distribution at each time since

I0 ∼ N ïV 2ð ∼ N ïR6ð with V the condensate volume. 35 Figure 2c depicts this quantity versus

8

time and demonstrates that N scales as t−1, collapsing onto a single curve at late times

irrespective of the peptide concentration. This behavior is consistent with a coalescence

mechanism: the volume fraction φ remains constant over time, and applying the scaling law

for coalescence, R3 ∼ φt ∼ N R3t, leads to N ∼ t−1, with a prefactor that is independent of

φ.

Additionally, Figure 2b illustrates the nucleation preceding the condensate growth. As

the peptide concentration approaches the saturation concentration (≈400 µM), an increas-

ingly long induction time is observed before a suﬃcient signal-to-noise ratio on the scattering

intensity permits to infer condensate size (see the 400 and 600 µM curves on Fig. 2b). A close

examination of the SAXS curves at 400 µM reveals no detectable evolution until 32 s, while

within the following seconds, the scattering intensity dramatically increases. We hypoth-

esize that prior to nucleation, each isolated RNA chain is decorated with bound peptides.

This interpretation is supported by a comparison between the average scattering intensity

measured prior to nucleation and the sum of the individual contributions from peptides and

RNA. As the former exceeds the latter (Fig. ??), peptides are indeed bound to RNA. From

the forward scattering intensity, we estimate that approximately 30 peptides are associated

with each RNA chain (see Supporting Information). Furthermore, ﬁtting the average scat-

tering intensity using the Fisher–Burford model (Fig. ??), 36 which describes simple fractal

aggregates, yields a mass fractal dimension of 1.4. This value indicates that the clusters

adopt an extended, chain-like conformation, with an overall size (Rg = 13 nm) comparable

to that of bare RNA (Rg = 11.6 nm).

To get deeper insights into the early events at the molecular level, we perform coarse-

grained molecular dynamics (MD) simulations with implicit solvent. The numerical model is

able to reproduce a saturation concentration of 350 µM (Fig. ??), that is, within the range of

values found experimentally (Fig. 1d; ≈400 µM). Peptides and RNA are initially mixed in a

simulation box, and Figure 3 depicts the time evolution of the number of peptides contained

in the largest peptide-RNA cluster. Very rapidly, all the peptides bind on RNA, which are

9

thus decorated with an average of 50 peptides.

Interestingly, the total number of bound

peptides barely varies afterwards (Fig.??c), conﬁrming the role of peptide-decorated RNA

as subunits. The peptide-RNA clusters further grow in a stepwise manner by coalescence.

This is illustrated on Fig.3 wherein the steps observed in the number of peptides in the

largest cluster become higher over the course of the simulation.

In particular, snapshots

4 and 5 show two clusters comprising 400 and 200 peptides, respectively, that is, 8 and 4

RNA chains (Fig. ??b), respectively, fusing into a single cluster. Note that fusion events are

increasingly rare with the simulation time steps as the diﬀusion of larger clusters is slower.

Figure 3: Coarse-grained MD simulation of passively-formed condensates. The graph plots the number of peptides in the largest cluster as a function of the simulation time steps in logarithmic scale. The snapshots illustrate the coalescence events as labeled on the graph. Peptides (800 µM) are in green and RNA (0.5 g.L-1) in purple.

At the macroscopic level, mean radii exceeding a few micrometers cannot be probed reli-

ably even by ultra-small-angle X-ray scattering. Therefore, we carry out confocal microscopy

imaging by using again 0.5% of ﬂuorescent TAMRA-peptide. Figure 4a depicts a low mag-

niﬁcation view of condensates at a peptide concentration of 1,000 µM, 25 min after mixing

with RNA. The radius distribution, shown in Fig. 4b, resembles a lognormal distribution,

as expected from a coalescence mechanism. 19 No macroscopic phase separation is observed,

most likely as a result of coulombic repulsion that self-regulates the growth mechanism of

10

12345the condensates. 21

Figure 4: (a) Confocal microscopy image of condensates obtained with a peptide concen- tration of 1,000 µM including 0.5% of TAMRA-peptide and 0.5 g.L-1 of RNA. The image is acquired 25 min after mixing components at 37 °C. (b) Condensate radius distribution (N = 707) inferred from a larger view of (a). The red line is a ﬁt with a lognormal distribu- tion.

Network-like local structure under active condition

In the subsequent series of experiments, we examine the growth kinetics of condensates under

active condition. The serine residues of the RRASLRRASL peptide are initially phospho-

rylated, which results in a neutral net charge. As a consequence, mixing phosphorylated

peptides and RNA does not give rise to phase separation. Phase separation is instead trig-

gered by the action of lambda phosphatase (LPP), which cleaves the phosphate groups from

phosphorylated peptides. Figure 5a plots scattering curves collected under the same concen-

trations as in Fig. 2a in the presence of 800 U.mL-1 LPP and using initially phosphorylated

peptide (see Fig. ?? for other peptide concentrations). The condensate formation is much

slower than under passive condition because phase separation is now limited by the LPP en-

zymatic activity. Secondly, the scattering curves in the intermediate q-values, i.e., between

10-2 and 10-1 nm-1, diﬀer markedly. The inset of Figure 5a presents a comparison between

two scattering curves with similar I0 values. For actively-formed condensates, I(q) decays

11

at smaller q-values indicating large condensate sizes, but the slope is moderate (I ∼ q−2.4),

which suggests a local mass fractal structure akin to that found in gels. Therefore, instead

of ﬁtting the scattering curves with a model of polydisperse spheres as earlier, we apply a

model of polydisperse mass fractal clusters with a stretched exponential cutoﬀ function. 36,37

The form factor of the clusters is expressed by:

F (q; ξ) =

+∞

Z

0

rD−1h(r; ξ)

+∞

sin(qr) qr

dr

Z

0

(cid:14)

rD−1h(r; ξ)dr

(2)

where D stands for the fractal dimension and h(r; ξ) is a cutoﬀ function setting the cluster

size ξ. The denominator ensures the normalization condition, namely, F (q → 0; ξ) = 1. We

choose a generic form for the cutoﬀ function, i.e., h(r; ξ) = e−(r/ξ)β

with β = 3 as it ﬁts

satisfactorily the scattering curves at late times. As before (Eq. 1), the scattering intensity

is computed as a convolution product of the form factor and a lognormal size distribution

deﬁned by p(ξ; ïξ(t)ð, ∆ξ(t)), so that

+∞

I(t, q) ∼

Z

0

F (q; ξ)p(ξ; ïξ(t)ð, ∆ξ(t))ξ2D(t)dξ

(3)

with a prefactor ensuring that I(t, q → 0) = I0(t). In practice, the scattering curves are ﬁtted

over the region q < 0.1 nm-1, which corresponds to length scales larger than a single RNA

chain. The blue dashed lines of Figure 5a represents ﬁts to the experimental data (black solid

lines), providing estimates of ïξ(t)ð, ∆ξ(t) and D(t) for each condition. Figure 5b depicts

the time evolution of ïξð for three peptide concentrations. We observe mostly two steps:

(i) Condensates with size varying around 100 nm are formed from the ﬁrst minutes after

mixing. These condensates display a network-like local structure as evidenced by a mass

fractal dimension D below 2 (Fig. 5c). After some period of maturation during which D

increases steadily while ïξð remains unchanged, the condensates abruptly start to increase

in size, with ïξð seemingly converging toward the classical coarsening behavior scaling as t1/3

(black dashed line in Fig. 5b). During the latter stage, D remains stable above 2.5, which

12

indicates that the condensates are already relatively dense and compact. Notice that at 600

µM peptide concentration, no growth is observed for at least the ﬁrst 2,000 s. Increasing

the LPP concentration from 800 U.mL-1 to 1,200 U.mL-1 (gray discs in Figs. 5b and c)

shortens the maturation stage consistently with higher enzymatic activity. Finally, it is worth

mentioning that although the condensate polydispersity ∆ξ/ïξð varies signiﬁcantly during

the maturation stage, it tends to a nearly constant value during the growth stage (Fig. ??),

consistently with the self-similar size distribution encountered in coarsening mechanisms.

Figure 5: TR-USAXS measurements under active conditions. (a) Scattering curves at various times (black solid lines) ﬁtted with a polydisperse mass fractal model (blue dashed lines). The solution contains 1,000 µM of initially phosphorylated peptide, 0.5 g.L-1 of RNA and 800 U.mL-1 of LPP. The inset compares two scattering curves collected with peptide and RNA concentrations of 1,000 µM and 0.5 g.L-1, respectively, under passive (gray dashed line) and active (black solid line; 800 U.mL-1 of LPP), at times where the I0 values are similar. (b) Mean condensate size ïξð as a function of time for various peptide concentrations. LPP concentration is 800 U.mL-1 except in one experiment (gray discs; 1,200 U.mL-1). The dashed line indicates a scaling law in t1/3. (c) Mass fractal dimension D versus time for the same experimental conditions as in (b).

Next, we investigate the evolution of actively-formed condensates over extended length

and time scales by confocal microscopy. Figures 6a-d depicts confocal microscopy images

acquired at various times for a peptide concentration of 1,000 µM. Figure 6e represents the

time evolution of the mean radius ïRð and the standard deviation calculated from image

analysis. ïRð increases until ∼60 min and remains constant afterwards. Once again, the

condensates attain a steady state due to a self-regulation driven by coulombic repulsion.

13

abcNote that the radii deduced by confocal microscopy (Fig. 6e) are underestimated compared to

those obtained by X-ray scattering (Fig. 5b) because the sizes are near the resolution limit of

the confocal setup. At a lower peptide concentration of 600 µM, confocal microscopy reveals

that 2 h are necessary for the condensate mean radius to reach 1 µm (Fig. ??). Interestingly,

the normalized size distributions, R/ïRð, computed at various times, are mostly identical,

which supports the self-similarity hypothesized earlier with TR-USAXS data. Additionally,

these distributions are slightly asymmetric, resembling the lognormal distribution expected

for a coalescence mechanism. 19 This is further illustrated by Figs. 6g and h showing three

coalescence events occurring over 4 min.

Figure 6: Confocal microscopy of actively-formed condensates. Initial phosphorylated pep- tide concentration is 1,000 µM including 0.5% of TAMRA-peptide, and LPP concentration is 800 U.mL-1. (a-d) Condensate images acquired at various times after mixing components. (e) Mean condensate radius ïRð versus time obtained from image analysis. Error bars are standard deviations. (f) Normalized size distribution R/ïRð at various times during growth and steady-state stages. Black dashed line is a lognormal distribution plotted for compar- ison. (g-h) Coalescence events between condensates observed at three diﬀerent locations (white boxes).

14

ahfegbdcActively-formed condensates exhibit faster nanoscale dynamics

Intrigued by the diﬀerence of local structures uncovered by X-ray scattering, we carry out

ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) measurements to estimate the diﬀusivity

of TAMRA-peptide within both passively- and actively-formed condensates in the steady

state. Figures 7a-d demonstrate the liquid-like nature of condensates with a ﬂuorescence

recovery obtained within just a few seconds. By integrating the ﬂuorescence intensity over

condensates and ﬁtting the time evolution with an exponential decay function, the diﬀusivity

of TAMRA-peptide, Dc, is estimated (Figs. 7e and f). TAMRA-peptide diﬀuses twice as fast

within actively-formed condensates (0.024 µm2.s-1) as within passively-formed condensates

(0.012 µm2.s-1). This ﬁnding agrees well with the loosely-packed, network-like local structure

measured for actively-formed condensates, which confers a facilitated translational mobility

to peptides.

Figure 7: FRAP measurements on passively- and actively-formed condensates in the steady state. Peptide concentration is 1,000 µM including 0.5% of TAMRA-peptide. For active condition, 800 U.mL-1 of LPP is used. (a-d) Confocal microscopy images of an actively- formed condensate at various times after photobleaching. Normalized ﬂuorescence intensity versus time for passively- (e) and actively-formed (f) condensates. A dozen condensates are used for each condition. Error bars are standard deviations. The diﬀusivities Dc are deduced by ﬁtting the data with an exponential decay function (red line).

15

aPrebleachbcdef0s0.6 s2.3 sConclusion

The kinetics of the liquid–liquid phase separation leading to the formation of biomolecular

condensates composed of a cationic, phosphorylatable peptide and polyU RNA – under

both passive and active conditions – are compared using multiscale approaches that span

up to four decades in time and bridge spatial scales from the molecular to the micrometer

level. Based on the results, Figure 8 proposes two growth mechanisms depending on whether

enzymatic activity is involved or not.

Figure 8: Schematics of the growth mechanisms for passively- and actively-formed biomolec- ular condensates.

For passively-formed condensates, peptides bear a positive net charge and bind on RNA

16

rapidbindingslowcrosslinkingnucleationmaturationcoalescencecoalescencepassiveactiveRNApeptidephosphorylated peptidepartially phosphorylatedpeptidetimein less than a millisecond after mixing. Peptide-decorated RNA then serve as subunits

and remarkably behave as an immiscible ﬂuid in a solvent. After nucleation, spherically-

shaped, compact condensates steadily grow following the classical coarsening scaling law in

ïRð = (Kt)1/3. The prefactor K, supported by confocal microscopy images and MD simula-

tions, suggest a Brownian motion-induced coalescence mechanism. Eventually, coalescence

is impaired by coulombic repulsion, leading to a steady state.

As for actively-formed condensates, phosphorylated peptides bear a zero net charge

and bind on RNA upon phosphate cleavage by LPP. Resultantly, RNA chains are slowly

crosslinked by dephosphorylated peptides making up loosely-packed condensates with a

network-like local structure. Recall that a phosphorylated peptide bears two serines, each of

which carries one phosphate group cleavable by LPP independently of the other. Under the

action of LPP, peptides can be dephosphorylated (two phosphate groups cleaved) or par-

tially phosphorylated (only one phosphate group cleaved). Dephosphorylated peptides are

however required to trigger phase separation. 34 As dephosphorylation proceeds, more RNA

chains are uptaken by condensates whin in turn become more compact. After some matu-

ration period, perhaps once dephosphorylated peptides are in suﬃcient amount, condensate

size abruptly increases driven by coalescence, until the steady state is reached.

Elucidating the nonequilibrium dynamics of biomolecular condensates is essential for

understanding the functions and the pathological signiﬁcance of membraneless organelles

in the cell, as well as to design synthetic liquid-like carriers for intracellular delivery of

therapeutic mRNA for instance. 38 Even though the phase diagram of multicomponent ﬂuid

mixtures is inherently complex, particularly in the presence of charged polymers, 39–41 the

growth kinetics of our passively-formed condensates obey the ordinary droplet coarsening

law (ïRð ∼ t1/3) for simple binary mixture. Introducing enzymatic activity delays the onset

of the thus reaction-limited growth, but more importantly, kinetic eﬀects modulate the local

structure of condensates. A loosely-packed content may be crucial for preventing dynamical

arrest that can occur with the highly charged biomolecules found in the cell nucleus. 42 In that

17

sense, enzymatic activity may not only regulate the formation and dissolution of biomolecular

condensates, but also the viscoelastic properties that govern nanoscale dynamics. 42,43

A recent study has reported that kinetics govern the large-scale spatial organization of

phase-separated DNA droplets. 44 In particular, fast condensation was found to promote the

formation of hyperuniform structures. Although our passively-formed condensates grow on

a faster time scale, we ﬁnd no clear evidence of hyperuniformity, neither on scattering curves

nor on confocal microscopy images (Fig. ??). Therefore, the other factors that govern the

large-scale spatial organization of phase-separating ﬂuids are yet to be identiﬁed.

At last, a number of condensates, notably transcriptional condensates, are immersed

in a crowded environment that can be modeled as heterogeneous elastic medium. Recent

theoretical advances have uncovered a rich diversity of condensate growth kinetics governed

by local environmental stiﬀness. 45 Investigating these eﬀects experimentally using model

condensates will be an important direction for future research.

Acknowledgement

We thank Laetitia Gargowitsch for polyU characterizations, Rapha¨el Maire for his help on

hyperuniformity and Antoine Maury for confocal microscopy observations. This work is

supported by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche (contract ANR-21-CE30-0001-02). G.T.

acknowledges the ESRF for allocating beamtime.

Supporting Information Available

Experimental methods, characterizations of polyU and peptides, supplementary ﬁgures with

MD simulations, TR-USAXS data and confocal microscopy images.

18

References

(1) Hyman, A. A.; Weber, C. A.; J¨ulicher, F. Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation in Biology.

Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. 2014, 30, 39–58.

(2) Shin, Y.; Brangwynne, C. P. Liquid phase condensation in cell physiology and disease.

Science 2017, 357, eaaf4382.

(3) Mittag, T.; Pappu, R. V. A conceptual framework for understanding phase separation

and addressing open questions and challenges. Mol. Cell 2022, 82, 2201–2214.

(4) Hirose, T.; Ninomiya, K.; Nakagawa, S.; Yamazaki, T. A guide to membraneless or-

ganelles and their various roles in gene regulation. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2023, 24,

288–304.

(5) Lyon, A. S.; Peeples, W. B.; Rosen, M. K. A framework for understanding the functions

of biomolecular condensates across scales. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2021, 22, 215–235.

(6) Gao, N.; Mann, S. Membranized Coacervate Microdroplets: from Versatile Protocell

Models to Cytomimetic Materials. Acc. Chem. Res. 2023, 56, 297–307.

(7) Saini, B.; Mukherjee, T. K. Biomolecular Condensates Regulate Enzymatic Activity

under a Crowded Milieu: Synchronization of Liquid–Liquid Phase Separation and En-

zymatic Transformation. J. Phys. Chem. B 2023, 127, 180–193.

(8) Berry, J.; Weber, S. C.; Vaidya, N.; Haataja, M.; Brangwynne, C. P. RNA transcription

modulates phase transition-driven nuclear body assembly. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.

2015, 112, E5237–E5245.

(9) Brangwynne, C. P.; Eckmann, C. R.; Courson, D. S.; Rybarska, A.; Hoege, C.;

Gharakhani, J.; J¨ulicher, F.; Hyman, A. A. Germline P Granules Are Liquid Droplets

That Localize by Controlled Dissolution/Condensation. Science 2009, 324, 1729–1732.

19

(10) Van Treeck, B.; Protter, D. S. W.; Matheny, T.; Khong, A.; Link, C. D.; Parker, R. RNA

self-assembly contributes to stress granule formation and deﬁning the stress granule

transcriptome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2018, 115, 2734–2739.

(11) Gall, J. G. The centennial of the Cajal body. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell. Biol. 2003, 4, 975–

980.

(12) Wang, B.; Zhang, L.; Dai, T.; Qin, Z.; Lu, H.; Zhang, L.; Zhou, F. Liquid–liquid phase

separation in human health and diseases. Sig. Transduct. Target. Ther. 2021, 6, 290.

(13) Savastano, A.; Ib´a˜nez de Opakua, A.; Rankovic, M.; Zweckstetter, M. Nucleocapsid

protein of SARS-CoV-2 phase separates into RNA-rich polymerase-containing conden-

sates. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 6041.

(14) Monahan, Z.; Ryan, V. H.; Janke, A. M.; Burke, K. A.; Rhoads, S. N.; Zerze, G. H.;

O’Meally, R.; Dignon, G. L.; Conicella, A. E.; Zheng, W.; Best, R. B.; Cole, R. N.;

Mittal, J.; Shewmaker, F.; Fawzi, N. L. Phosphorylation of the FUS low-complexity

domain disrupts phase separation, aggregation, and toxicity. EMBO J. 2017, 36, 2951–

2967.

(15) Qamar, S. et al. FUS Phase Separation Is Modulated by a Molecular Chaperone and

Methylation of Arginine Cation-π Interactions. Cell 2018, 173, 720–734.e15.

(16) Hofweber, M.; Dormann, D. Friend or foe—Post-translational modiﬁcations as reg-

ulators of phase separation and RNP granule dynamics. J. Biol. Chem. 2019, 294,

7137–7150.

(17) Bray, A. J. Theory of phase-ordering kinetics. Adv. Phys. 2002, 51, 481–587.

(18) Cates, M. E.; Tjhung, E. Theories of binary ﬂuid mixtures:

from phase-separation

kinetics to active emulsions. J. Fluid. Mech. 2018, 836, P1.

20

(19) Berry, J.; Brangwynne, C. P.; Haataja, M. Physical principles of intracellular organi-

zation via active and passive phase transitions. Rep. Prog. Phys. 2018, 81, 046601.

(20) Zhou, H.-X.; Kota, D.; Qin, S.; Prasad, R. Fundamental Aspects of Phase-Separated

Biomolecular Condensates. Chem. Rev. 2024, 124, 8550–8595.

(21) von Hofe, J.; Abacousnac, J.; Chen, M.; Sasazawa, M.; Jav´er Kristiansen, I.; Westrey, S.;

Grier, D. G.; Saurabh, S. Multivalency Controls the Growth and Dynamics of a

Biomolecular Condensate. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2025, 147, 25242–25253.

(22) Mathur, A.; Ghosh, R.; Nunes-Alves, A. Recent Progress in Modeling and Simulation

of Biomolecular Crowding and Condensation Inside Cells. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2024,

64, 9063–9081.

(23) Regy, R. M.; Dignon, G. L.; Zheng, W.; Kim, Y. C.; Mittal, J. Sequence dependent

phase separation of protein-polynucleotide mixtures elucidated using molecular simu-

lations. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020, 48, 12593–12603.

(24) Alshareedah, I.; Moosa, M. M.; Raju, M.; Potoyan, D. A.; Banerjee, P. R. Phase

transition of RNA-protein complexes into ordered hollow condensates. Proc. Natl. Acad.

Sci. U. S. A. 2020, 117, 15650–15658.

(25) Narayanan, T.; Wacklin, H.; Konovalov, O.; Lund, R. Recent applications of syn-

chrotron radiation and neutrons in the study of soft matter. Crystallogr. Rev. 2017,

23, 160–226.

(26) Chevreuil, M.; Law-Hine, D.; Chen, J.; Bressanelli, S.; Combet, S.; Constantin, D.; De-

grouard, J.; M¨oller, J.; Zeghal, M.; Tresset, G. Nonequilibrium self-assembly dynamics

of icosahedral viral capsids packaging genome or polyelectrolyte. Nat. Commun. 2018,

9, 3071.

21

(27) Amann, M.; Diget, J. S.; Lyngsø, J.; Pedersen, J. S.; Narayanan, T.; Lund, R. Kinetic

Pathways for Polyelectrolyte Coacervate Micelle Formation Revealed by Time-Resolved

Synchrotron SAXS. Macromolecules 2019, 52, 8227–8237.

(28) Dharan, R.; Shemesh, A.; Millgram, A.; Zalk, R.; Frank, G. A.; Levi-Kalisman, Y.;

Ringel, I.; Raviv, U. Hierarchical Assembly Pathways of Spermine-Induced Tubulin

Conical-Spiral Architectures. ACS Nano 2021, 15, 8836–8847.

(29) Kra, K.; Li, S.; Gargowitsch, L.; Degrouard, J.; P´erez, J.; Zandi, R.; Bressanelli, S.;

Tresset, G. Energetics and Kinetic Assembly Pathways of Hepatitis B Virus Capsids in

the Presence of Antivirals. ACS Nano 2023, 17, 12723–12733.

(30) Martin, E. W.; Harmon, T. S.; Hopkins, J. B.; Chakravarthy, S.; Incicco, J. J.;

Schuck, P.; Soranno, A.; Mittag, T. A multi-step nucleation process determines the

kinetics of prion-like domain phase separation. Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 4513.

(31) Narayanan, T.; Sztucki, M.; Zinn, T.; Kieﬀer, J.; Homs-Puron, A.; Gorini, J.;

Van Vaerenbergh, P.; Boesecke, P. Performance of the time-resolved ultra-small-angle

X-ray scattering beamline with the Extremely Brilliant Source. J. Appl. Cryst. 2022,

55, 98–111.

(32) Vela, S. D.; Braun, M. K.; D¨orr, A.; Greco, A.; M¨oller, J.; Fu, Z.; Zhang, F.;

Schreiber, F. Kinetics of liquid–liquid phase separation in protein solutions exhibit-

ing LCST phase behavior studied by time-resolved USAXS and VSANS. Soft Matter

2016, 12, 9334–9341.

(33) Takahashi, R.; Narayanan, T.; Sato, T. Growth Kinetics of Polyelectrolyte Complexes

Formed from Oppositely-Charged Homopolymers Studied by Time-Resolved Ultra-

Small-Angle X-ray Scattering. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2017, 8, 737–741.

(34) Aumiller, W. M.; Keating, C. D. Phosphorylation-mediated RNA/peptide complex

22

coacervation as a model for intracellular liquid organelles. Nature Chem. 2016, 8, 129–

137.

(35) Mykhaylyk, O. O. In Neutrons, X-rays, and Light, 2nd ed.; Lindner, P., Oberdisse, J.,

Eds.; Elsevier, 2025.

(36) Sorensen, C. M. Light Scattering by Fractal Aggregates: A Review. Aerosol Science

and Technology 2001, 35, 648–687.

(37) Nicolai, T.; Durand, D.; Gimel, J.-C. Static structure factor of dilute solutions of poly-

disperse fractal aggregates. Phys. Rev. B 1994, 50, 16357–16363.

(38) Sun, Y.; Wu, X.; Shen, K.; Guo, K.; Lim, D. S.; Chew, W. L.; Yu, J.; Miserez, A.

Polyethylene-Glycol-Conjugated Peptide Coacervates with Tunable Size for Intracellu-

lar mRNA Delivery. ACS Nano 2025, 19, 24724–24735.

(39) Brangwynne, C. P.; Tompa, P.; Pappu, R. V. Polymer physics of intracellular phase

transitions. Nature Phys. 2015, 11, 899–904.

(40) Deviri, D.; Safran, S. A. Physical theory of biological noise buﬀering by multicomponent

phase separation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2021, 118, e2100099118.

(41) Chen, F.; Li, X.; Guo, W.; Wang, Y.; Guo, M.; Shum, H. C. Size Scaling of Condensates

in Multicomponent Phase Separation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2024, 146, 16000–16009.

(42) Galvanetto, N.; Ivanovi´c, M. T.; Del Grosso, S. A.; Chowdhury, A.; Sottini, A.; Net-

tels, D.; Best, R. B.; Schuler, B. Material properties of biomolecular condensates emerge

from nanoscale dynamics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2025, 122, e2424135122.

(43) Tanaka, H. Viscoelastic phase separation in biological cells. Commun. Phys. 2022, 5,

1–12.

(44) Wilken, S.; Chaderjian, A.; Saleh, O. A. Spatial Organization of Phase-Separated DNA

Droplets. Phys. Rev. X 2023, 13, 031014.

23

(45) Meng, L.; Mao, S.; Lin, J. Heterogeneous elasticity drives ripening and controls burst-

ing kinetics of transcriptional condensates. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2024, 121,

e2316610121.

24

TOC Graphic

25

Supporting Information:

Multiscale Growth Kinetics of Model

Biomolecular Condensates Under Passive and

Active Conditions

Tamizhmalar Sundararajan,

Matteo Boccalini,! Rom´eo Suss, ,¶ Sandrine

Mariot,

Emerson R. Da Silva,§,

Fernando C. Giacomelli,∥,

Austin Hubley,§

Theyencheri Narayanan,§ Alessandro Barducci,! and Guillaume Tresset∗,



Universit´e Paris-Saclay, CNRS, Laboratoire de Physique des Solides, 91405 Orsay, France

!Centre de Biologie Structurale, Universit´e de Montpellier, CNRS, INSERM, 34090

Montpellier, France

¶Universit´e Paris-Saclay, ENS Paris-Saclay, CNRS, CentraleSup´elec, LuMIn, 91190

Gif-sur-Yvette, France

§Departamento de Biof´ısica, Universidade Federal de S˜ao Paulo, S˜ao Paulo 04062-000,

∥Centro de Ciˆencias Naturais e Humanas, Universidade Federal do ABC, Santo Andr´e,

Brazil

Brazil

§ESRF - The European Synchrotron, 38043 Grenoble, France

E-mail: guillaume.tresset@universite-paris-saclay.fr

S-1

Materials

The phosphorylated (RRApSLRRApSL), dephosphorylated (RRASLRRASL), and N-terminus

labeled 5-carboxytetramethylrhodamine (5-TAMRA) forms of the peptide were synthesized

by ProteoGenix. Poly(uridylic acid) potassium salt (polyU), approximately 250 nucleotides

long (Fig. S1), HEPES free acid, dithiothreitol, magnesium chloride, manganese chloride,

and adenosine 5-triphosphate disodium salt hydrate were purchased from Sigma Aldrich.

Lambda protein phosphatase was obtained from New England Biolabs. Poly(L-lysine)-g-

poly(ethylene glycol) (PLL-g-PEG) was purchased from SUSOS (Switzerland). Buﬀer, RNA,

and peptide stock solutions are prepared using Milli-Q water, and the buﬀer is subsequently

ﬁltered and autoclaved. Condensates are formed by mixing polyU RNA at a ﬁxed concen-

tration of 0.5 g.L-1 unless otherwise stated, with various concentrations of peptide ranging

from 100-2,000 µM in a physiological buﬀer containing 4 mM MgCl2, 2.25 mM ATP, 1.6 mM

dithiothreitol, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4 at 37 °C. The samples are thoroughly mixed for at

least 1-2 min by pipetting, which allows all components to be evenly distributed.

Figure S1: Size distribution of polyU RNA in terms of number of nucleotides measured by mass photometry. The mean number of nucleotides is 250 and the standard deviation 80. PolyU RNA concentration is 2 nM.

S-2

Turbidity measurements

Turbidity measurements are performed using an AvaSpec spectrophotometer equipped with

AvaSoft software and a Quantum Northwest TC1 Peltier temperature controller at an ab-

sorbance wavelength of 500 nm at 37 °C. For the phase diagram, multiple series of exper-

iments are conducted, varying the peptide concentration from 100 to 1,000 µM at various

RNA concentrations ranging from 0.25 to 0.75 mg.ml-1. The samples have a total volume of

500 µL and are incubated at 37 °C for 5 min in a quartz cuvette before measurement.

Confocal microscopy

Confocal images are acquired using a Leica TCS SP8 laser scanning confocal inverted mi-

croscope equipped with a ×63 oil objective and an H501-T Okolab temperature-controlled

stage maintained at 37 °C. The slides and coverslips are treated with O2 plasma for surface

activation and to ensure a sterile environment for the samples. To prevent breakage and

excessive spreading of the condensates, microscopic slides and coverslips are incubated with

poly(L-lysine)-g-poly(ethylene glycol) (PLL-g-PEG) at a concentration of 0.5 g.L-1 in 0.5

mL of 10 mM HEPES buﬀer pH 7.4 for 30 min, followed by rinsing with HEPES buﬀer.

The PLL-g-PEG coating passivates the glass surface, preventing condensates from adher-

ing to the slide and thereby helping maintain their spherical morphology. A small fraction

(≃0.5%) of TAMRA-conjugated peptides is incorporated into the total peptide mixture for

ﬂuorescence detection.

The slides are lined with a silicone spacer of 0.24-mm thickness. A total volume of 130 µL

of sample is prepared and pipetted on microscopic slides with cavity wells, which have a depth

of 0.6-0.8 mm to prevent evaporation during imaging. The samples are then covered with

coverslips of 0.17-mm thickness. The excitation/emission wavelengths for TAMRA-peptide

are 543 nm/569–589 nm. Time-lapse acquisition experiments are conducted, capturing im-

ages every minute over a period of 1-2 hours.

S-3

Coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations

All molecular dynamics simulations are performed using OpenMM (v7.5) S1 in the NVT en-

semble, employing a Langevin integrator with a time step of 10 fs and a friction coeﬃcient

of 0.01 ps-1. We use the recently published CALVADOS RNA force ﬁeld model. S2 In CAL-

VADOS, RNA is modeled as a two-bead-per-nucleotide model potential and includes several

components: a bond term Ub, an angle term Ua, an electrostatic term UDH, a short-range

Ashbaugh-Hatch S3 (AH) term UAH, and a neighbor stacking term UST. The bonded potential

is expressed as:

Ub =

1 2

kb(r − r0)2

(1)

where kb is the spring constant and r0 is the equilibrium bond length. These parameters

are determined separately for the backbone-backbone and backbone-base distances. For the

backbone-backbone bond, r0 = 0.59 nm with a spring constant of 1,400 kJ/mol/nm2. For

the backbone-base bond, the equilibrium length is 0.54 nm with a spring constant of 2,200

kJ/mol/nm2. The angle potential is introduced to account for the stiﬀness of the backbone

chain:

Ua =

1 2

ka(¹ − ¹0)2

(2)

where ka is the spring constant, and ¹0 is the equilibrium bond angle. For the backbone

chain, ka = 4.2 kJ/mol/nm2 and ¹0 = 3.141 rad. Short-range interactions are modeled using

the Ashbaugh-Hatch (AH) potential:

UAH =  

ϵ

12

−

σ r

6

σ r

+ ϵ(1 − ¼)

for r f 21/6Ã

h(cid:0) 4¼ϵ

(cid:1)

σ r

12

(cid:1)

(cid:0) −

6

i σ r

for r > 21/6Ã

(3)

(cid:1) where ϵ = 0.8368 kJ/mol, and Ã and ¼ are the eﬀective molecular diameter and stickiness

(cid:0)

(cid:1)



h(cid:0)

i

S-4

parameters, respectively. For interactions between diﬀerent bead types, the combination

rules are applied: Ã = (Ãi + Ãj)/2, ¼ = (¼i + ¼j)/2. The AH potential is truncated and

shifted at a cutoﬀ distance of 2 nm. Neighbor stacking interactions are modeled by the

AH potential with a smaller Ã to mimic strong anisotropic interactions between neighboring

beads. The stacking potential is expressed as:

UST = nSTUAH(ÃST)

(4)

where nST is the scaling factor (typically larger than 1), and ÃST is smaller than the bead

diameter to mimic strong interactions between neighbors. In this case, ÃST = 0.4 nm and

nST = 15. The stacking potential is also truncated and shifted at a distance of 2.0 nm,

consistent with the AH potential. Electrostatic interactions are modeled using the Debye-

H¨uckel (DH) potential:

UDH =

qiqj 4Ãϵ0ϵr

e−r/λD r

(5)

where qi and qj are the charges of the interacting beads (with -e for backbone, 0 for base),

ϵ0 the vacuum permittivity, ϵr the dielectric constant of water, and ¼D the Debye length.

The DH potential is truncated and shifted at a cutoﬀ distance of 4 nm. The Debye length

is selected to reproduce the experimental phase diagram.

All the peptides are modeled using the CALVADOS 2 force ﬁeld. S4 For peptide-RNA

interactions, the combination rules for the AH potential are applied as described above.

To complete.

Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS)

SAXS experiments are conducted at the ID02 beamline of the European Synchrotron Radia-

tion Facility (ESRF) in Grenoble (France) at a photon energy of 12.4 keV. The 2D scattering

S-5

Figure S2: Numerical phase diagram showing the condensation of RNA chains (purple) by peptides (green) at varying peptide concentrations. The peptide saturation concentration is around 350 µM. To change ”protein” into ”peptide”.

Figure S3: MD simulation results on the formation of peptide-RNA clusters. (a) Time evolution of the number of RNA chains in the largest cluster. (b) Time evolution of the number of peptides in the largest cluster. (c) Total number of peptides interacting with RNA chains as a function of time. The peptide concentration is 800 µM and the RNA concentration 0.5 g.L-1.

patterns are collected using an Eiger2 4M detector (Dectris, Baden, Switzerland). The data

are then radially averaged to 1D intensity proﬁles I(q), where q is the wavenumber and is

expressed as q = (4Ã/¼) sin(¹/2) with ¼ the wavelength and 2¹ the scattering angle.

The sample-to-detector distance is set to 31 m to explore q-values ranging from 2 × 10−3

to 0.25 nm−1, enabling us to gain more insights into the large-scale structures of biomolecular

condensates. For measuring the individual components, the sample-to-detector distance is

set to 3 m for RNA and 1 m for peptide, reaching a q range of 2 × 10−2 to 2 nm−1. All the

S-6

abcmeasurements are carried out at 37 °C.

The sample is placed in a ﬂow-through quartz capillary cell with a diameter of 2 mm.

For each measurement, around 100 µL of sample solution is thoroughly mixed by repeated

pipetting for about one minute and is injected into the capillary. The capillary is thoroughly

cleaned using Hellmanex, ethanol, deionized water, buﬀer, and dried using compressed air

between diﬀerent samples. To ensure the samples are washed away from the capillary, the

background sample (buﬀer) is often measured between samples to make sure it remains

consistent with previously measured buﬀers.

For fast kinetics, time-resolved ultra-small-angle X-ray scattering (TR-USAXS) exper-

iments are performed at the ID02 beamline using an SFM-4000 stopped-ﬂow device (Bio-

Logic Science Instruments, France) to capture the early time scales of condensate formation.

Stock solutions of RNA, peptide, and buﬀer are loaded into syringes, and the required ﬁnal

solutions are injected into the stopped-ﬂow capillary cell with a diameter of 1.2 mm at a

total ﬂow rate of 4.2 or 6.25 mL.s-1, resulting in a dead time of 2.5 ms. For each kinetic

measurement, 50 successive frames are captured with an exposure time of 5 ms per frame.

The intervals between frames followed a geometric progression with a ratio of 1.23, and each

kinetic measurement is repeated at least twice to ensure reliability.

For both SAXS and TR-USAXS, the scattering intensities are scaled to absolute in-

tensities. Further data analysis, such as buﬀer subtraction and averaging, is performed

using SAXSUtilities software. S5 TR-USAXS curves are then ﬁtted with a polydispersity

sphere model with lognormal size distribution to extract the radius of the condensates using

SASView package. S6

At the supersaturation, before the condensate formation, RNA chains are not aggregated

and each of them is assumed to be decorated with a number n of peptides. The forward

scattering intensity I0 can be written as:

I0 = cRNA (n∆bp + ∆bRNA)2 + (cp − ncRNA)∆b2 p

(6)

S-7

Figure S4: SAXS data (black lines) of RRASLRRASL peptide and its phosphorylated form at 2.95 mM and 3.4 mM, respectively. The red dashed lines are Guinier ﬁts plotted for qRg < 1. The curves are shifted for clarity.

Figure S5: SAXS data (black line) of polyU RNA at 1.5 g.L-1. The red dashed line is a Guinier ﬁt plotted for qRg < 1. The inset is a Kratky representation of the same data.

with cRNA and cp are the molar RNA and peptide concentrations, respectively, while ∆b2

RNA

and ∆b2

p are the excess scattering lengths related to RNA and peptide, respectively. The ﬁrst

S-8

Figure S6: TR-USAXS curves showing the growth kinetics of passively-formed condensates at peptide concentrations ranging from 2,000 to 400 µM (a to d). Each curve represents a distinct time from 2.5 ms to 481.94 s. RNA concentration is maintained at 0.5 g.L-1 for all peptide concentrations, except at 2,000 µM peptide, where it is increased to 1 g.L-1. The progressive leftward shift of the Guinier region at low q-values indicates condensate growth.

term of Eq. 6 arises from the RNA chains decorated with n peptides, whereas the second

term accounts for the remaining free peptides. From separate measurements (Figs. S5 and

S4), we ﬁnd ∆bRNA = 0.0892 SI and ∆bp = 9.057 × 10−4 SI for scattering intensities in cm-1

and molar concentrations in µM. By solving Eq. 6, the number of bound peptides per RNA

chain reads S7

n =

Γ2 +

s

I0 − I ∗ 0 cRNA∆b2 p

− Γ

S-9

(7)

Figure S7: Comparison between two consecutive sets of TR-USAXS data (in black and red) at selected times, under passive condition. Both experiments are performed by mixing 1,000 µM of peptide with 0.5 g.L-1 of RNA.

where Γ = ∆bRNA/∆bp − 1/2 and I ∗

0 = cRNA∆b2

RNA + cp∆bp. With I0 estimated from the

scattering curve during induction (Fig. S8), we obtain n = 30 ± 3. The scattering curve is

further ﬁtted with a Fisher-Burford model S8 that provides a simple approximation for mass

fractal clusters, i.e.,

I(q) = I0

1 +

(cid:18)

−D/2

2 3D

q2R2 g

(cid:19)

(8)

where D stands for the mass fractal dimension. We obtain D = 1.4 and Rg = 13 nm, which

indicates that peptide-decorated RNA at the supersaturation exhibit an extended chain-like

conformation with an overall size close to that of bare RNA.

Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching (FRAP)

Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) experiments are conducted using a Leica

TCS SP8 laser scanning confocal inverted microscope equipped with a ×63 oil objective and

S-10

Figure S8: Supersaturated peptide-decorated RNA with 400 µM of peptide and 0.5 g.L-1 of RNA. (Black solid line) Average scattering curves measured during induction. (Gray solid line) Scattering curve calculated as the sum of peptide and RNA contributions. (Red dashed line) Fisher-Burford ﬁt with a mass fractal dimension of 1.4 and a radius of gyration of 13 nm.

an H501-T Okolab temperature-controlled stage maintained at 37 °C. Individual condensates

are photobleached for 2 s. A total of 100 frames are captured to monitor ﬂuorescence recovery

over time. Approximately 15 condensates are analyzed under passive and active conditions.

The confocal images are processed using a custom ImageJ macro that normalizes ﬂuo-

rescence intensity within the bleached region against a control region. The macro extracts

mean intensities from user-deﬁned regions of interest (ROIs). The extracted intensity values

are plotted over time and ﬁtted with an exponential decay function. The characteristic time

Ä is extracted from the ﬁt, and the diﬀusion coeﬃcient Dc is calculated using the formula:

Dc =

w2 4Ä

(9)

where w is the radius of the bleached area.

S-11

Figure S9: TR-USAXS curves showing the growth kinetics of actively-formed condensates with initially phoshorylated peptide concentrations ranging from 1,000 to 600 µM (a to d). RNA concentration is maintained at 0.5 g.L-1 for all samples and LPP concentration is set to 800 U.mL-1 for all samples (b-d), except in (a), where it is increased to 1,200 U.mL-1. The bump at q ≃ 0.8 nm-1 on panel (a) is due to an instrumental artifact that could not be corrected a posteriori.

Large-scale structure factor

The analysis begins by converting each confocal microscopy image Figs. S12a,b to a grayscale

format to simplify intensity processing. To reduce boundary artifacts and minimize the in-

ﬂuence of interfacial regions, a radial mask is applied to the image. S9 This mask accounts for

the lack of periodicity in the image and ensures that only the central region of the sample

image contributes to the analysis. Next, a two-dimensional Fourier transform is performed

on the masked image. This transformation converts the spatial intensity distribution into

S-12

Figure S10: Time evolution of the polydispersity ∆À/ïÀð under active conditions. LPP concentration is 800 U.mL-1 except in one experiment (gray discs) where it is 1,200 U.mL-1.

reciprocal space, yielding the intensity structure factor, which reﬂects the spatial correlations

within the sample at a given wavenumber q. Due to the isotropy of the system, a radial

average of the two-dimensional structure factor is computed to obtain a one-dimensional

representation of the scattering intensity. This averaging process collapses the angular infor-

mation, resulting in a structure factor proﬁle, S(q). The characteristic hyperuniform scaling

S(q) ∼ q2 at small q-values, observed in phase-separated DNA droplets S9 and indicative of

suppressed long-wavelength density ﬂuctuations, is not evident in this case. Instead, S(q)

appears to plateau at low q (Fig. S12c), showing no signs of hyperuniformity in the system.

S-13

Figure S11: (a–d) Confocal microscopy images of condensates formed under active condition, taken at various times after mixing. The samples contain 600 µM of initially phosphorylated peptide, ∼ 0.5% TAMRA-peptide, 0.5 mg.ml-1 RNA and 800 U.mL-1 LPP. (e) Mean con- densate radius ïRð as a function of time, obtained from image analysis. Error bars represent standard deviations. (f) Normalized size distribution normalized at diﬀerent stages of con- densate growth.

Figure S12: Confocal microscopy images of condensates with peptide concentration of 1,000 µM under passive (a) and active (b) conditions. Both images are taken in steady state, when the size distribution no longer evolves signiﬁcantly. (c) Structure factor S(q) calculated on the two preceding images under passive (blue) and active (red) conditions.

S-14

References

(S1) Eastman, P.; Swails, J.; Chodera, J. D.; McGibbon, R. T.; Zhao, Y.; Beauchamp, K. A.;

Wang, L.-P.; Simmonett, A. C.; Harrigan, M. P.; Stern, C. D.; Wiewiora, R. P.;

Brooks, B. R.; Pande, V. S. OpenMM 7: Rapid development of high performance

algorithms for molecular dynamics. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2017, 13, e1005659.

(S2) Yasuda, I.; von B¨ulow, S.; Tesei, G.; Yamamoto, E.; Yasuoka, K.; Lindorﬀ-Larsen, K.

Coarse-Grained Model of Disordered RNA for Simulations of Biomolecular Conden-

sates. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2025, 21, 2766–2779.

(S3) Ashbaugh, H. S.; Hatch, H. W. Natively Unfolded Protein Stability as a Coil-to-Globule

Transition in Charge/Hydropathy Space. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008, 130, 9536–9542.

(S4) Tesei, G.; Lindorﬀ-Larsen, K. Improved predictions of phase behaviour of intrinsically

disordered proteins by tuning the interaction range. Open Res. Europe 2023, 2 .

(S5) Sztucki, M. SAXSutilities2: a graphical user interface for processing and analysis

of Small-Angle X-ray Scattering data (1.024). https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.

5825707, 2021.

(S6) https://www.sasview.org/.

(S7) Chevreuil, M.; Law-Hine, D.; Chen, J.; Bressanelli, S.; Combet, S.; Constantin, D.; De-

grouard, J.; M¨oller, J.; Zeghal, M.; Tresset, G. Nonequilibrium self-assembly dynamics

of icosahedral viral capsids packaging genome or polyelectrolyte. Nat. Commun. 2018,

9, 3071.

(S8) Sorensen, C. M. Light Scattering by Fractal Aggregates: A Review. Aerosol Science

and Technology 2001, 35, 648–687.

(S9) Wilken, S.; Chaderjian, A.; Saleh, O. A. Spatial Organization of Phase-Separated DNA

Droplets. Phys. Rev. X 2023, 13, 031014.

S-15