Spin-to-charge conversion modulated by chiral

 molecules

 Peng-Yi Liu,1 Tian-Yi Zhang,1 Ai-Min Guo,2 Yossi Paltiel,3,4 Qing-Feng Sun1,5*

 1International Center for Quantum Materials, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing,

 100871, China.



2Hunan Key Laboratory for Super-microstructure and Ultrafast Process, School of Physics,

 Central South University, Changsha 410083, China.

 3Institute of Applied Physics, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 9190401, Israel.

 4Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem

 9190401, Israel.

 5Hefei National Laboratory, Hefei 230088, China.

 *Corresponding author: sunqf@pku.edu.cn

 ABSTRACT. Molecular chirality and electron spin are intricately intertwined via the fascinating

 phenomenon of chiral-induced spin selectivity (CISS), which has garnered considerable attention

 due to its extensive potential applications. A recent experiment has revealed that chiral molecules

 self-assembled

on

the

gold

surface

can

modulate

the

inverse

spin

Hall

effect,

providing

an

 alternative

platform

for

studying

the

interplay

between

chirality

and

spin

transport.

Our

study

 1



uncovers that this modulation stems from the CISS effect, which enhances spin currents of one

 spin orientation while suppressing those of the opposite spin orientation. We provide numerical

 results

that

are

highly

consistent

with

the

experimental

phenomena

and

further

investigate

the

 influence

of

various

factors

on

this

modulation.

This

work

offers

a

theoretical

explanation

of

 previously unexplained experimental findings, and the underlying physical mechanism broadens

 current perspectives on understanding and applying CISS.

 TEXT.



Molecular

chirality,

a

property

attracting

increasing

attention,

is

pivotal

in

many

chemical

 reactions

and

biological

processes.

When

spin-unpolarized

electrons

transmit

through

chiral

 materials,

they

become

highly

spin-polarized,

which

has

been

substantiated

by

numerous

 experiments since 1999 and is known as chiral-induced spin selectivity (CISS).1–3 CISS embodies

 the profound connection between molecular chirality and electron spin, and research in this area

 has gained popularity in recent years.4–9 It is widely accepted that spin-orbit coupling (SOC) plays

 an

essential

role

in

CISS.10–15

Some

research

attributes

the

spin

selectivity

to

the

chiral

 molecule/substrate

interface.16,17

Additionally,

other

studies

suggest

that

the

electron-electron

 interaction,18

electron-phonon

interactions,19

and

spin-dependent

scattering20

could

also

be

 responsible for CISS. Although a universal theory that fully comprehends the CISS effect remains

 unclear, the huge research potential of CISS has inspired many experimental21–24 and application25–

27 investigations.



A recent experiment has established an extra framework for investigating CISS,28 promising to

 unlock the applications of chiral molecules in high-dimensional systems and hybrid systems. In

 2





this experiment, Moharana et al. grew a thin layer of gold (Au) on a ferromagnetic substrate and

 employed ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) as a spin pump. This setup injects electrons with spins

 parallel to the external magnetic field into the gold and ejects those with spins antiparallel to the

 external

magnetic

field

out

of

the

gold,

creating

a

spin

current

that

conveys

spin

angular

 momentum.29

Due

to

the

strong

spin-orbit

coupling

in

gold,

electrons

with

opposite

spin

 orientations

undergo

deflection

in

opposite

directions.

Consequently,

a

charge

current

passing

 through gold can cause a transverse spin current, which is the spin Hall effect (SHE).30 Conversely,

 in that experiment, FMR pushes a spin current passing through gold causing a transverse charge

 current, leading to a Hall voltage, which is the inverse spin Hall effect (ISHE).29

 Results

from

the

recent

experiment28

show

that

for

the

bare

gold

layer,

the

sign

of

the

Hall

 voltage

reverses

upon

reversing

the

magnetic

field,

while

the

absolute

values

remain

equal.

In

 contrast, after self-assembling chiral molecules (specifically, α-helix polyalanines) on the surface

 of the gold film, the sign of the Hall voltage reverses upon reversing the magnetic field, but the

 absolute values are no longer equal. In other words, there is an asymmetry in the spin-to-charge

 conversion

process

induced

by

the

self-assembled

chiral

molecules.

Moreover,

the

experiment

 demonstrates that the asymmetry induced by L-rotation α-helix (L-α-helix) and D-rotation α-helix

 (D-α-helix) polyalanines is the opposite, whereas racemic mixtures do not induce any asymmetry.

 In contrast to the previous chiral-related electric Hall effects, which need charge current,27,31 this

 experiment

is

more

interesting because the

ISHE

is

caused by pure spin

current.

Despite

these

 fascinating findings and their strong correlation with CISS, the underlying theoretical mechanism

 remains unclear, inscrutable, and requires further elucidation.

 In this Letter, we focus on an FMR-SHE-chiral molecules system (see Figure 1a), identical to

 the

experiment,28

and

investigate

the

modulation

of

chiral

molecules

on

the

spin-to-charge

 3



conversion. We demonstrate that a spin current is driven from the ferromagnetic substrate into the

 gold by FMR. Due to the CISS effect, chiral molecules can enhance the spin current with spins

 aligned in one direction while hindering those aligned in the opposite direction, which is the origin

 of the asymmetric spin-to-charge conversion observed in the experiment. Furthermore, we found

 that reversing the chirality of the molecules also reverses their modulation effect and studied the

 dependence

of

the

modulation

strength

on

system

parameters.

Notably,

we

fully

explain

this

 experiment

using

the

CISS

effect

of

chiral

molecules,

and

the

numerical

results

are

highly

 consistent

with

the

experimental

observations.

The

ISHE

experiment

and

our

work

together

 demonstrate a feasible approach to regulating spin currents at room temperature.

 4





Figure

1.

The

schematic

diagrams

of

the

model

and

ISHE.

(a)

The

schematic

diagrams

of

the

ISHE

 modulated by chiral molecules. The ferromagnetic substrate, a thin layer of gold, L-α-helix molecules, and

 the electrodes measuring the Hall voltage are shown in black, gold, red, and white, respectively. (b) is the

 schematic diagram of the ISHE, which is an enlarged diagram of the microscopic details of (a). FMR in the

 ferromagnetic substrate (shown in grey) causes the precession of the magnetization and injects the spin

 current ܫ௦ (shown in the red arrow) with the spin angular momentum parallel to ࡮ into the gold, where ࡮ is

 the external magnetic field controlling the spin direction. In the experiment and our discussion, ࡮ is in the

 ݕݖ-plane and forms an angle of ߙ with the ݕ-axis. Grey dots with opposite arrows represent electrons with

 spins parallel and antiparallel to ࡮ in the gold (shown in gold) driven by FMR and deflecting in opposite

 directions, resulting a Hall charge current ܫ௘ (the green arrow) and Hall voltage. (c) The amplitude of spin

 current ܫ௦(ߙ, +ܤ) (grey

curve)

injected

into

the

gold

and

its

counterpart

with

a

reversed

magnetic

field

 ܫ௦(ߙ, −ܤ) (black curve). (d) The minus Hall voltage −ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ) (grey curve) and the Hall voltage with a

 reversed

magnetic

field ܸு(ߙ, −ܤ) (black

curve).

(c)

and

(d)

are

calculated

in

the

absence

of

chiral

 molecules. The parameters used here are provided in Section S1 of the Supporting Information.



To

theoretically

investigate

the

experiment

and

elucidate

the

underlying

mechanisms,

we

 construct

a

tight-binding

model

capturing

the

key

components

of

the

experimental

device:

a

 ferromagnetic substrate

performing

FMR,

a metallic (gold) layer exhibiting

ISHE, two

voltage

 probes measuring the Hall voltage, and a self-assembled monolayer of chiral molecules. Each part

 of

the

system

and

their

coupling

are

modeled

explicitly,

enabling

standard

spin

transport

 simulations. Full details of the model and numerical implementation are provided in Sections S1

 and S2 of the Supporting Information.

 First, we simulate the conventional ISHE in the absence of chiral molecules. Consider the same

 setup as the experiment,28 which consists of a ferromagnetic substrate coated with a thin layer of

 gold (Figure 1a but without chiral molecules). In the experiment, a microwave was applied to the

 5



ferromagnetic

substrate

to

excite

the

precession

of

magnetization

direction

around

the

external

 magnetic

field ࡮.

During

this

process,

spins

accumulate

at

the

ferromagnetic/gold

interface.

 Electrons with spins parallel to ࡮ experience an increase in their electrochemical potential by eܸ଴,

 while those with antiparallel spins undergo a decrease by eܸ଴, resulting in a Fermi energy splitting

 ∆ߤ = 2eܸ଴ ≈ ℏ߱ .32

Here,

e

and

ℏ

represent

the

elementary

charge

and

the

reduced

Planck

 constant, respectively. ܸ଴ is the spin bias33 that can drive a spin current. Given that the frequency

 of FMR ߱ ≈ 2ߨ × 10ଵ଴Hz,28 ܸ଴ is on the order of ten microvolts.



In the model (with details in Section S1 of Supporting Information), the ferromagnetic substrate

 and the magnetic field cause a Zeeman splitting along the direction of ࡮. More importantly, we

 set the ferromagnetic substrate to have the spin bias ܸ଴, which drives a spin current ܫ௦ flowing from

 the

ferromagnetic

substrate

into

the

gold. The

spin

current

is

a

tensor

and

comprises

both

the

 direction of spin angular momentum and the direction of current.29,34 In this device, the direction

 of current is from the ferromagnetic substrate towards the gold (+ݖ direction), while the direction

 of the spin angular momentum is controlled by ࡮. In other words, electrons with spin parallel to

 ࡮ are pushed into the gold layer, while those with spin antiparallel to ࡮ are pulled out from the

 gold layer, as shown in Figure 1b.

 When the spin current passes through a gold layer, as shown in Figure 1b, electrons with opposite

 spins deflect in opposite directions, leading to a Hall charge current (ܫ௘ in Figure 1b) due to ISHE.

 This results in a measurable Hall voltage at the electrodes in the ݔ-direction (perpendicular to both

 the

direction

of

the

spin

current

and

the

direction

of

the

spin

angular

momentum),

depicted

in

 Figures 1a

and 1b. We adopt the Bernevig-Hughes-Zhang model35 to simulate the ISHE in the

 gold

layer

(see

Section

S1

of

the

Supporting

Information

and

Figure

S1).

Utilizing

the

non-

equilibrium Green's function method, we calculate not only the Hall voltage ܸு (as the experiment

 6



measured)

but

also

the

magnitude

of

the

spin

current

ܫ௦

which

is

challenging

to

measure

 experimentally (see Section S1 of the Supporting Information for details).



Figure 1c illustrates the spin current under different directions of the magnetic field without the

 coupling of the chiral molecules ܫ௦(ߙ, +ܤ), where +ܤ signifies that the magnetic field used here

 is positive, corresponding to the reversed magnetic field −ܤ discussed later. As in the experiment,

 the magnetic field ࡮ is set in the ݕݖ-plane and ߙ represents the angle between the direction of ࡮

 and the ݕ-axis. For example, when ߙ = 0 (ߨ/2), FMR pumps spin current with the spin angular

 momentum point to the ݕ- (ݖ-) direction. For varying ߙ, ܫ௦ fluctuates but remains positive, as the

 spin current is driven into the gold layer by the spin bias regardless of the spin directions. Figure

 1d shows the minus Hall voltages −ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ), as the experiment measured.28 The charge current

 induced by ISHE is proportional to a cross product29,30 between the spin current (point to +ݖ) and

 the spin angular momentum (parallel to ࡮). Therefore ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ) has an angle-dependent factor

 ∝ ࢠො × ࡮෡ = sin(ߨ/2 − ߙ),

where ࢠො

(࡮෡ )

represents

the

unit

vector

point

to +ݖ (parallel

to ࡮).

 Therefore, −ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ) reaches

its

maximum

(minimum)

at ߙ = 0 (±ߨ),

vanishes

and

changes

 sign at ߙ = ±ߨ/2, due to the changing direction of the spin angular momentum, which is the same

 as the experimental results.28

 In addition, we also present the spin current and Hall voltage when ࡮ is reversed (denoted by

 −ܤ). The spin current is still positive for all ߙ [ܫ௦(ߙ, −ܤ) shown in Figure 1c], but the Hall voltage

 changes

sign

since

the

opposite

direction

of

the

spin

angular

momentum

[ܸு(ߙ, −ܤ) shown

in

 Figure

1d].

More

importantly,

the

relationships

ܫ௦(ߙ, +ܤ) = ܫ௦(ߙ, −ܤ)

and

−ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ)

 =

ܸு(ߙ, −ܤ) hold exactly protected by a symmetry (see Section S2 of the Supporting Information

 for the details). That is to say, when ࡮ is reversed, ܫ௦ remains unchanged, ܸு is reversed and its

 7



absolute value remains unchanged, while without the coupling of chiral molecules, which is well

 consistent with the recent experiment.28



To further investigate the role of molecular chirality, we now incorporate chiral molecules into

 the model. As in the experiment, we consider a layer of chiral molecules self-assembled on the

 gold

surface,

as

illustrated

in

Figures

1a

and

S1.

Given

that

the

polyalanines

employed

in

the

 experiment

possess

a

single-helical

structure,

we

correspondingly

use

a

model

of

ߙ -helical

 molecules for simulation, which has chirality and has proven successful in capturing the essential

 physics

of

CISS.14,36–38

It

demonstrates

that

spin-unpolarized

charge

currents

become

spin-

polarized after passing through chiral molecules;14 it reproduces the recent CISS experiments in

 electron donor–acceptor systems6 and reveals the underlying spin-selective dynamics;37 and it also

 successfully explains many magnetic phenomena induced by CISS.38 These prior results validate

 the model as a powerful framework for simulating CISS-related phenomena.

 The detailed Hamiltonian is given by ܪெ = ܪ௠௢௟ + ܪௌை஼:



௅೛

ே೛ ܪ௠௢௟ = ෍ ቈ෍ ݀௡,௟ ௡ୀଵ ே೛

௟ୀଵ ௅೛ିଵ ܪௌை஼ = ෍ ෍ ෍ 2iݐ௦௝ cos ߮௟௝

ା ൫ܧ௣ݏ଴ − ܯݏఈ൯݀௡,௟

௅೛ି௟

௡ୀଵ

௟ୀଵ

௝ୀଵ

௅೛ିଵ

௅೛ି௟

+ ෍ ෍ ݐ௝݀௡,௟

ା ݏ଴݀௡,௟ା௝

௟ୀଵ

௝ୀଵ

+ ℎ. ܿ. ቉

,

(1)

 ି ݀௡,௟

ା ݏ௟௝݀௡,௟ା௝

+ ℎ. ܿ. ,

where ݀௡,௟

ା = [݀௡,௟,↑

ା , ݀௡,௟,↓

ା ] is

the

creation

of

electrons

at

site ݈

of

the ݊-th

molecule,

with ↑/↓

 representing the spin degree of freedom. Each molecule has ܮ௣ sites (i.e., the molecule length is

 ܮ௣), and there are ܰ௣ molecules coupled to the surface of the gold. ܯ is the Zeeman term. ܧ௣ is

 the on-site energy of molecules. ݐ௝ and ݐ௦௝ are the hopping and SOC between site ݈ and site ݈ + ݆,

 respectively.߮௟௝

ି = ݆∆߮/2, where ∆߮ is the twist angle between the two nearest sites, determining

 the chirality (∆߮ = 5ߨ/9, −5ߨ/9,0 for L-α-helix, D-α-helix, and achiral molecules, respectively).

 8



ݏ௟௝ is a 2 × 2 matrix related to the geometry of the molecule.14 The model and parameters details

 can be found in Section S1 of the Supplementary Information.

 Similar to the case without molecules, we calculate the variations of the spin current ܫ௦(ߙ, +ܤ)

 passing through the ferromagnetic/gold interface and the minus Hall voltage −ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ) with ߙ

 and compare them with those under the reversed magnetic fields. The numerical results are shown

 in Figure 2.

 Figure 2 The influence of chiral molecules on the ISHE. (a, d, g, j) The schematic diagrams, (b, e, h, k)

 spin currents ܫ௦, and (c, f, i, l) Hall voltages ܸு of four different situations. In (a-c) and (d-f), we perform

 the calculations with the self-assembling of the L-α-helix and D-α-helix molecules, respectively. In (g-i)

 and (j-l), the racemic mixture and achiral molecules are respectively used as two control groups. Data with

 positive magnetic field [ܫ௦(ߙ, +ܤ) and −ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ)] are shown in light red, green, and grey curves for L-

α-helix molecules, D-α-helix molecules, and control groups, respectively. Data with reversed magnetic field

 9





[ܫ௦(ߙ, −ܤ) and ܸு(ߙ, −ܤ)] are shown in dark colors, correspondingly. Parameters used here and the details

 of control groups (g-l) are provided in Supporting Information.

 First, the magnitude of ܫ௦ and ܸு in Figure 2 are larger than those in Figure 1 due to the flow of

 spin

current

into

molecules.

More

importantly,

as

shown

in

Figures

2b

and

2c,

an

asymmetry

 appears when L-α-helix molecules are coupled to the gold surface (see Figure 2a). Specifically,

 the

relations

ܫ௦(ߙ, +ܤ) = ܫ௦(ߙ, −ܤ)

and

−ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ)

 = ܸு(ߙ, −ܤ)

no

longer

hold,

which

is

 consistent with the experimental results [see Figure S2 and Ref. 28]. Due to the CISS effect, the L-

α-helix molecules can facilitate the spin current with the spin angular momentum point toward the

 +ݖ-direction while hindering that with the spin angular momentum point toward the −ݖ-direction.

 Consequently,

at

ߙ = ߨ/2

( ࡮

aligns

with

+ݖ ),

spin

currents

with

+ܤ

propagate

through

 molecules more readily than those with −ܤ, resulting in ܫ௦(ߨ/2, +ܤ) > ܫ௦(ߨ/2, −ܤ) (see Figure

 2b).

A

larger

spin

current

can

cause

a

larger

Hall

effect,

so

around ߙ = ߨ/2 (0 < ߙ < ߨ),

the

 absolute

values

of

Hall

voltages

with +ܤ are

larger

than

those

with −ܤ,

i.e., |ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ)| >

|ܸு(ߙ, −ܤ)| as shown in Figure 2c. Similarly, at around ߙ = −ߨ/2 (−ߨ < ߙ < 0) the asymmetry

 reverses due to the opposite direction of ࡮, resulting in ܫ௦(ߙ, +ܤ) < ܫ௦(ߙ, −ܤ) and |ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ)| <

|ܸு(ߙ, −ܤ)|. When ߙ = 0 and ±ߨ, ࡮ is perpendicular to the helix axis of chiral molecules, and

 CISS

cannot

select

the

spin

currents

with

+ܤ

or

−ܤ ,

leading

to

the

disappearance

of

the

 asymmetry. When ߙ = ±ߨ/2, ࡮ is in ±ݖ direction and the asymmetry is the largest for ܫ௦ due to

 the CISS effect of the chiral molecules, but the asymmetry for ܸு disappears with the vanished

 Hall voltage ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ) = ܸு(ߙ, −ܤ) = 0, since ࡮ parallel to ±ݖ direction cannot cause the Hall

 voltage as we discussed above. Therefore, the most notable asymmetry for ܸு appears when ߙ ≈

±ߨ/4, ±3ߨ/4. All these details in Figures 2b and 2c are in good agreement with the experiment

 10



(see Figure S2), and we conclude that the asymmetries in Ref.

28 arise from the CISS effect of

 chiral molecules.



In Figures 2d-2f, we consider D-α-helix molecules as a comparison for Figures 2a-2c. One of

 the characteristics of CISS is that molecules with opposite chirality exhibit opposite spin selectivity.

 So,

D-α-helix

molecules

modulate

the

spin

currents

and

Hall

voltages

oppositely

to

L-α-helix

 molecules, leading to the emergence of an opposite asymmetry. For example, when 0 < ߙ < ߨ,

 ܫ௦(ߙ, +ܤ) < ܫ௦(ߙ, −ܤ),

resulting

in |ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ)| < |ܸு(ߙ, −ܤ)|.

These

results

also

align

well

 with experimental observations (as shown in Figure S2), and the opposite modulation effects of

 different chiralities support the role of CISS in this process.

 To

further

ensure

that

the

modulation

of

Hall

voltages

arises

from

molecular

chirality,

we

 consider two control groups as in the experiment: the racemic mixture of chiral molecules [shown

 in Figures 2g-2i] and achiral molecules [shown in Figures 2j-2l]. In the experiment, the racemic

 mixture consists of equal fractions of both optical rotations.28 So, we assemble mixed L-α-helix

 and D-α-helix molecules in equal proportions on the gold surface to simulate the racemic mixture.

 Specifically, we employ 1000 sets of random configurations to perform the numerical calculations

 and use the average results (see Figure S3 and Section S3 of the Supporting Information for the

 details). In each configuration, each molecule has a 50% probability of being L-α-helix and a 50%

 probability of being D-α-helix. The average results and the results with the error bar are shown in

 Figures 2h, 2i and S3. The data under ±ܤ exhibits only little discrepancies and fails to show chiral-

induced asymmetry in ISHE, which is consistent with the experiment.28 As another control group,

 we use simple one-dimensional-chain molecules to simulate achiral molecules, assembled on the

 gold

surface

in

the

same

way.

The

results

also

demonstrate

no

chirality-induced

asymmetry

 (Figures

2k

and

2l).

Although

both

control

groups

successfully

confirm

that

the

asymmetry

 11



described

above

originates

from

chirality,

the

expected

relations

ܫ௦(ߙ, +ܤ) = ܫ௦(ߙ, −ܤ)

and

 −ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ) = ܸு(ߙ, −ܤ) have slight deviations. We attribute these deviations to the mismatch

 between the SHE model (containing pseudospin) and the molecular model (without pseudospin).

 Because this can be overcome by a refined matching of the SHE and molecular models, as shown

 in Figure S4c. In real systems, the atomic orbitals of the molecules and substrate differ greatly,

 and similar mismatches inevitably exist, resulting in finite deviations in the control experiment as

 well.28

More

detailed

discussions

of

control

groups

are

provided

in

Figure

S3,

Figure

S4,

and

 Section S3 of the Supporting Information.

 Figure 3 The modulation strength of chiral molecules on the ISHE. (a) The summation of Hall voltages

 under opposite magnetic fields Σܸு(ߙ) with L-α-helix and D-α-helix molecules are shown in red and green

 curves, respectively. (b) The effective spin selectivity ܵ(ߙ) calculated by the definition as in the experiment.

 Data with L-α-helix molecules, D-α-helix molecules, and no molecules are shown in red, green, and blue

 curves, respectively. The parameters used here are the same as those in Figure 2.

 To

evaluate the

modulation strength of chiral molecules

to ISHE, in

Figure 3a, we show the

 difference between −ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ) and ܸு(ߙ, −ܤ), which is the summation of the Hall voltages of

 opposite

magnetic

fields Σܸு = ܸு(ߙ, −ܤ) − [−ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ)] = ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ) + ܸு(ߙ, −ܤ).

When

 ߙ = 0 and ±ߨ, the spin angular momentum of the spin current is perpendicular to the helix axis

 12





of chiral molecules, so CISS cannot select spin current, and Σܸு ≈ 0 is observed for both L-α-

helix

and

D-α-helix

molecules.

Since

ISHE

arises

from

the

cross

product

of

the

spin

current

 direction and spin angular momentum, Hall signals vanish at ߙ = ±ߨ/2 where they are parallel.

 Thus, we also have Σܸு ≈ 0 at ߙ = ±ߨ/2, even if the modulation of chiral molecules to ܫ௦ reaches

 the strongest (see Figures 2b, 2e, and polar plot Figure S5). When ߙ ≠ 0, ±ߨ/2, and ±ߨ, CISS

 can

take

effect

while

the

Hall

signal

also

emerges

due

to

the

cross-product

relation

of

ISHE,

 resulting

in Σܸு(ߙ) forming

a

shape

of sin 2ߙ (− sin 2ߙ)

for

D-α-helix

(L-α-helix)

molecules.

 Therefore,

the

position

with

the

most

obvious

asymmetry

of

Hall

voltages

appears

at

ߙ ≈

±ߨ/4, ±3ߨ/4,

as

shown

in

Figure

3a,

which

gives

a

clear

understanding

of

the

experimental

 observations.28

 To

quantify

the

modulation

strength

of

chiral

molecules

on

the

Hall

voltage,

we

adopt

the

 effective

spin

selectivity

ܵ(ߙ) = [|ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ)| − |ܸு(ߙ, −ܤ)|]/[|ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ)| + |ܸு(ߙ, −ܤ)|]

 from Ref. 28, analogous to the spin polarization defined in prior studies.2 As shown in Figure 3b,

 the behavior of ܵ(ߙ) closely resembles a sine curve, with pronounced peaks and troughs occurring

 at

ߙ = ±ߨ/2 .

Notably,

at

these

angles,

the

Hall

voltages

vanish,

causing

ܵ(ߙ)

to

become

 indeterminate (0/0), thereby limiting the availability of data for both numerical simulations and

 experimental measurements.28 Except for the data near ߙ = ±ߨ/2, ܵ(ߙ) remains well-defined and

 measurable for all other ߙ values. The underlying mechanism for the behavior ܵ(ߙ) is rooted in

 the

spin

angular

momentum

direction

of

the ܫ௦ with

respect

to

the

chiral

molecules.

When ࡮ is

 perpendicular to the ݖ-direction (ߙ = 0, ±ߨ), the modulation strength vanishes, as CISS cannot

 distinguish spins perpendicular to the molecular helix axis. Conversely, as ߙ gradually approaches

 ±ߨ/2,

the

amplitude

of ܵ(ߙ) increases,

since

CISS

has

optimal

selectivity

for

spins

aligned

 parallel or antiparallel to the molecular helix axis. When 0 < ߙ < ߨ (−ߨ < ߙ < 0), ܵ(ߙ) > 0 (<

13



0) because the L-α-helix molecules enhance the spin current in the +ݖ direction and weaken that

 in the −ݖ-direction. The L-α-helix and D-α-helix molecules exhibit opposite modulation strength,

 arising

from

the

opposite

spin

selectivity

of

different

chirality

in

CISS.

In

sharp

contrast,

the

 absence

of

chiral

molecules

results

in

strictly

zero

spin

selectivity ܵ(ߙ) across

all ߙ values,

as

 shown

in

Figure

3b.

The

remarkable

similarity

between

the

experimentally

measured

spin

 selectivity28 and the shape of ܵ(ߙ) depicted in Figures S2c, S2f shows that the asymmetric spin-

to-charge conversion originates from the CISS of the chiral molecules.

 Figure 4 The length dependence of chiral modulation with L-α-helix molecules. The minus Hall voltages

 −ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ) [in (a)] and the effective spin selectivity ܵ(ߙ) [in (b)] with four different lengths of molecules



ܮ௣ = 12, 20, 25, and 40 are shown in different colors. Here, we use the L-α-helix molecules as an example.

 Parameters used here are provided in Section S1 of Supporting Information.

 In Figure 3b, the maximum of ܵ(ߙ) is about 23% with the molecule length ܮ௣ = 20 (the number

 of sites). The CISS effect becomes stronger for longer chiral molecules.10,14,21,39 Therefore, we also

 compare the modulation with different ܮ௣, the results are shown in Figure 4. Hall voltages with

 different

lengths

of

L-α-helix

molecules

show

similar

asymmetry

in

Figure

4a,

although

their

 amplitudes show little difference. The modulation ability of molecules with different lengths on

 the

ISHE is

demonstrated

in

Figure 4b. With the increase of ܮ௣, the amplitude of the sine-like

 14





curve of ܵ(ߙ) indeed increases. For example, the maximum of ܵ(ߙ) is more than 30% when the

 molecule length ܮ௣ = 40. The results for D-α-helix molecules give the opposite modulation and

 the same behavior of length dependence, as shown in Figure S6. In addition to the length, we also

 investigated the influence of dephasing strength on the regulation of ISHE by chiral molecules,

 which is regarded by many studies as an important part of CISS.10,14,40,41 As shown in Figure S7,

 as dephasing increases from almost zero to very strong, the spin selectivity first strengthens and

 then weakens, which is consistent with theoretical10,14,42 and experimental studies.43

 When the chiral molecules self-assemble on the gold surface, their helix axis forms a tilt angle

 of approximately 60° with respect to the sample surface to achieve stable self-assembly.28,44 In the

 above calculations, we have set the tilt angle 60° and azimuthal angle ߮ = 0 of the molecular helix

 axis (i.e., the helix axis is fixed at the ݔݖ-plane) as shown in Figure S1. Experiments show that the

 molecular helix axis also has freely valued azimuthal angles. Molecules with the same azimuthal

 angle form domains, and the experimental results are the combined outcomes of molecules in many

 different domains.28 So below we fix the tilt angle of 60° of the helix axis and the azimuthal angles

 are distributed isotropically and randomly in the interval [0,2ߨ) as in the experiment,28 (see Figure

 S8a for the azimuthal angle ߮). We calculated 1000 sets of random configurations and the average

 results

are

shown

in

Figure

S8.

The

asymmetric

modulation

of

chiral

molecules

on

the

Hall

 voltages ܸு well

holds.

The

summation

of

Hall

voltages Σܸு = ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ) + ܸு(ߙ, −ܤ) under

 opposite ࡮ still

resembles

a

sine

curve,

except

for

a

small

phase

shift

which

attributed

to

the

 mismatch between the ISHE model and the chiral molecular model.



In

this

work,

we

present

a

straightforward

physical

interpretation

of

how

chiral

molecules

 modulate the spin currents and, consequently, the ISHE signal observed in the experiment.28 Our

 simulations show that when the spin direction aligns closely with the CISS preferred direction, the

 15



spin current is enhanced, resulting in a stronger Hall voltage. In contrast, when the spin direction

 is

far

away

from

this

preferred

direction,

both

the

spin

current

and

Hall

voltage

are

obviously

 reduced. This directional dependence is consistently reflected in the simulated spin currents and

 Hall voltages. In addition, our numerical results, including the Hall voltages of bare gold, chiral

 molecules,

and

control

groups,

as

well

as

the

angular-resolved

spin

selectivity,

show

excellent

 agreement with the experimental observations.28 Together with the experiment, this Letter reveals

 a new

pathway

for tuning

spin transport and spin-to-charge conversion via

molecular chirality,

 offering fresh opportunities for molecular control in spintronic applications.

 SUPPORTING INFORMATION

 Section S1: Model details; Section S2: Sample geometry; Section S3: Details of control groups;

 Section

S4:

Supplenmentary

results;

Section

S5:

Supplementary

references;

Section

S6:

 Supplementary figures (Figures S1-S8). (PDF)

 AUTHOR INFORMATION

 Corresponding Author

 *Qing-Feng

Sun*

-

International

Center

for

Quantum

Materials,

School

of

Physics,

Peking

 University,

Beijing,

100871,

China;

Hefei

National

Laboratory,

Hefei

230088,

China.

Email:

 sunqf@pku.edu.cn



Notes

 The authors declare no competing financial interest.

 16









ACKNOWLEDGMENT

 P. L. thanks Zi-Jun Zhao for beautifying the schematics and Yue Mao for helpful discussions.

 This work was financially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants

 No. 12374034, No. 11921005, and No. 12274466), Innovation Program for Quantum Science

 and Technology (2021ZD0302403), Strategic priority Research Program of Chinese Academy of

 Sciences (Grant No. XDB28000000), and Hunan Provincial Science Fund for Distinguished

 Young Scholars (Grant No. 2023JJ10058). The authors also acknowledge the High-performance

 Computing Platform of Peking University for providing computational resources.



REFERENCES

 (1)

Ray,

K.;

Ananthavel,

S.

P.;

Waldeck,

D.

H.;

Naaman,

R.

Asymmetric

Scattering

of

 Polarized Electrons by Organized Organic Films of Chiral Molecules. Science 1999, 283 (5403),

 814–816. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.283.5403.814.

 (2)

Bloom, B. P.; Paltiel, Y.; Naaman, R.; Waldeck, D. H. Chiral Induced Spin Selectivity.

 Chem. Rev. 2024, 124 (4), 1950–1991. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.3c00661.

 (3)

Naaman, R.; Waldeck, D. H. Chiral-Induced Spin Selectivity Effect. J. Phys. Chem. Lett.

 2012, 3 (16), 2178–2187. https://doi.org/10.1021/jz300793y.

 (4)

Banerjee-Ghosh, K.; Ben Dor, O.; Tassinari, F.; Capua, E.; Yochelis, S.; Capua, A.; Yang,

 S.-H.; Parkin, S. S. P.; Sarkar, S.; Kronik, L.; Baczewski, L. T.; Naaman, R.; Paltiel, Y. Separation

 of Enantiomers by Their Enantiospecific Interaction with Achiral Magnetic Substrates. Science

 2018, 360 (6395), 1331–1334. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aar4265.

 17





(5)

Lu, H.; Wang, J.; Xiao, C.; Pan, X.; Chen, X.; Brunecky, R.; Berry, J. J.; Zhu, K.; Beard,

 M. C.; Vardeny, Z. V. Spin-Dependent Charge Transport through 2D Chiral Hybrid Lead-Iodide

 Perovskites. Sci. Adv. 2019, 5 (12), eaay0571. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aay0571.

 (6)

Eckvahl, H. J.; Tcyrulnikov, N. A.; Chiesa, A.; Bradley, J. M.; Young, R. M.; Carretta, S.;

 Krzyaniak, M. D.; Wasielewski, M. R. Direct Observation of Chirality-Induced Spin Selectivity

 in

Electron

Donor–Acceptor

Molecules.

 Science

 2023,

 382

 (6667),

 197–201.

 https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adj5328.

 (7)

Liu, S.; Kepenekian, M.; Bodnar, S.; Feldmann, S.; Heindl, M. W.; Fehn, N.; Zerhoch, J.;

 Shcherbakov, A.; Pöthig, A.; Li, Y.; Paetzold, U. W.; Kartouzian, A.; Sharp, I. D.; Katan, C.; Even,

 J.; Deschler, F. Bright Circularly Polarized Photoluminescence in Chiral Layered Hybrid Lead-

Halide Perovskites. Sci. Adv. 2023, 9 (35), eadh5083. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adh5083.

 (8)

Sun, R.; Wang, Z.; Bloom, B. P.; Comstock, A. H.; Yang, C.; McConnell, A.; Clever, C.;

 Molitoris, M.; Lamont, D.; Cheng, Z.-H.; Yuan, Z.; Zhang, W.; Hoffmann, A.; Liu, J.; Waldeck,

 D. H.; Sun, D. Colossal Anisotropic Absorption of Spin Currents Induced by Chirality. Sci. Adv.

 2024, 10 (18), eadn3240. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adn3240.

 (9)

Abdelwahab, I.; Kumar, D.; Bian, T.; Zheng, H.; Gao, H.; Hu, F.; McClelland, A.; Leng,

 K.; Wilson, W. L.; Yin, J.; Yang, H.; Loh, K. P. Two-Dimensional Chiral Perovskites with Large

 Spin

Hall

Angle

and

Collinear

Spin

Hall

Conductivity.

Science

2024,

385

(6706),

311–317.

 https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adq0967.

 (10)

Guo, A.-M.; Sun, Q. Spin-Selective Transport of Electrons in DNA Double Helix. Phys.

 Rev. Lett. 2012, 108 (21), 218102. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.218102.

 18



(11)

Gutierrez,

R.;

Díaz,

E.;

Naaman,

R.;

Cuniberti,

G.

Spin-Selective

Transport

through

 Helical

Molecular

 Systems.

 Phys.

 Rev.

 B

 2012,

 85

 (8),

 081404.

 https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.85.081404.

 (12)

Guo, A.-M.; Sun, Q. Enhanced Spin-Polarized Transport through DNA Double Helix by

 Gate Voltage. Phys Rev B 2012, 86 (3), 035424. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.86.035424.

 (13)

Guo,

A.-M.;

Sun,

Q.

Sequence-Dependent

Spin-Selective

Tunneling

along

Double-

Stranded DNA. Phys Rev B 2012, 86 (11), 115441. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.86.115441.

 (14)

Guo, A.-M.; Sun, Q.-F. Spin-Dependent Electron Transport in Protein-like Single-Helical

 Molecules.

 Proc.

 Natl.

 Acad.

 Sci.

 2014,

 111

 (32),

 11658–11662.

 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1407716111.

 (15)

Pan, T.-R.; Guo, A.-M.; Sun, Q.-F. Spin-Polarized Electron Transport through Helicene

 Molecular

 Junctions.

 Phys

 Rev

 B

 2016,

 94

 (23),

 235448.

 https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.94.235448.

 (16)

Gersten,

J.;

Kaasbjerg,

K.;

Nitzan,

A.

Induced

Spin

Filtering

in

Electron

Transmission

 through Chiral Molecular Layers Adsorbed on Metals with Strong Spin-Orbit Coupling. J. Chem.

 Phys. 2013, 139 (11), 114111. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4820907.

 (17)

Alwan, S.; Dubi, Y. Spinterface Origin for the Chirality-Induced Spin-Selectivity Effect.

 J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2021, 143 (35), 14235–14241. https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.1c05637.

 (18)

Fransson, J. Chirality-Induced Spin Selectivity: The Role of Electron Correlations. J. Phys.

 Chem. Lett. 2019, 10 (22), 7126–7132. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.9b02929.

 19



(19)

Das, T. K.; Tassinari, F.; Naaman, R.; Fransson, J. Temperature-Dependent Chiral-Induced

 Spin Selectivity Effect: Experiments and Theory. J. Phys. Chem. C 2022, 126 (6), 3257–3264.

 https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.1c10550.

 (20)

Nürenberg, D.; Zacharias, H. Evaluation of Spin-Flip Scattering in Chirality-Induced Spin

 Selectivity

Using

the

Riccati

Equation.

Phys.

Chem.

Chem.

Phys.

2019,

21

(7),

3761–3770.

 https://doi.org/10.1039/C8CP07257D.

 (21)

Göhler, B.; Hamelbeck, V.; Markus, T. Z.; Kettner, M.; Hanne, G. F.; Vager, Z.; Naaman,

 R.; Zacharias, H. Spin Selectivity in Electron Transmission Through Self-Assembled Monolayers

 of

 Double-Stranded

 DNA.

 Science

 2011,

 331

 (6019),

 894–897.

 https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1199339.

 (22)

Mishra, D.; Markus, T. Z.; Naaman, R.; Kettner, M.; Göhler, B.; Zacharias, H.; Friedman,

 N.; Sheves, M.; Fontanesi, C. Spin-Dependent Electron Transmission through Bacteriorhodopsin

 Embedded

in

Purple

Membrane.

Proc.

Natl.

Acad.

Sci.

2013,

110

(37),

14872–14876.

 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1311493110.

 (23)

Aizawa,

H.;

Sato,

T.;

Maki-Yonekura,

S.;

Yonekura,

K.;

Takaba,

K.;

Hamaguchi,

T.;

 Minato, T.; Yamamoto, H. M. Enantioselectivity of Discretized Helical Supramolecule Consisting

 of Achiral Cobalt Phthalocyanines via Chiral-Induced Spin Selectivity Effect. Nat. Commun. 2023,

 14 (1), 4530. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-40133-z.

 (24) Abendroth, J. M.; Nakatsuka, N.; Ye, M.; Kim, D.; Fullerton, E. E.; Andrews, A. M.; Weiss,

 P. S. Analyzing Spin Selectivity in DNA-Mediated Charge Transfer via Fluorescence Microscopy.

 ACS Nano 2017, 11 (7), 7516–7526. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.7b04165.

 20



(25)

Yang, S.-H.; Naaman, R.; Paltiel, Y.; Parkin, S. S. P. Chiral Spintronics. Nat. Rev. Phys.

 2021, 3 (5), 328–343. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42254-021-00302-9.

 (26)

Mathew,

S.

P.;

Mondal,

P.

C.;

Moshe,

H.;

Mastai,

Y.;

Naaman,

R.

Non-Magnetic

 Organic/Inorganic Spin Injector at Room Temperature. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2014, 105 (24), 242408.

 https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4904941.

 (27)

Eckshtain-Levi, M.; Capua, E.; Refaely-Abramson, S.; Sarkar, S.; Gavrilov, Y.; Mathew,

 S. P.; Paltiel, Y.; Levy, Y.; Kronik, L.; Naaman, R. Cold Denaturation Induces Inversion of Dipole

 and

Spin

Transfer

in

Chiral

Peptide

Monolayers.

Nat.

Commun.

2016,

7

(1),

10744.

 https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms10744.

 (28)

Moharana, A.; Kapon, Y.; Kammerbauer, F.; Anthofer, D.; Yochelis, S.; Shema, H.; Gross,

 E.; Kläui, M.; Paltiel, Y.; Wittmann, A. Chiral-Induced Unidirectional Spin-to-Charge Conversion.

 Sci. Adv. 2025, 11 (1), eado4285. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.ado4285.

 (29)

Saitoh, E.; Ueda, M.; Miyajima, H.; Tatara, G. Conversion of Spin Current into Charge

 Current at Room Temperature: Inverse Spin-Hall Effect. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2006, 88 (18), 182509.

 https://doi.org/10.1063/1.2199473.

 (30)

Sinova, J.; Valenzuela, S. O.; Wunderlich, J.; Back, C. H.; Jungwirth, T. Spin Hall Effects.

 Rev Mod Phys 2015, 87 (4), 1213–1260. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.87.1213.

 (31)

Kumar, A.; Capua, E.; Kesharwani, M. K.; Martin, J. M. L.; Sitbon, E.; Waldeck, D. H.;

 Naaman, R. Chirality-Induced Spin Polarization Places Symmetry Constraints on Biomolecular

 Interactions.

 Proc.

 Natl.

 Acad.

 Sci.

 2017,

 114

 (10),

 2474–2478.

 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1611467114.

 21



(32)

Brataas, A.; Tserkovnyak, Y.; Bauer, G. E. W.; Halperin, B. I. Spin Battery Operated by

 Ferromagnetic

 Resonance.

 Phys

 Rev

 B

 2002,

 66

 (6),

 060404.

 https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.66.060404.

 (33)

Wang,

D.-K.;

Sun,

Q.;

Guo,

H.

Spin-Battery

and

Spin-Current

Transport

through

a

 Quantum Dot. Phys Rev B 2004, 69 (20), 205312. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.69.205312.

 (34)

Sun,

Q.;

Xie,

X.

C.

Definition

of

the

Spin

Current:

The

Angular

Spin

Current

and

Its

 Physical

 Consequences.

 Phys.

 Rev.

 B

 2005,

 72

 (24),

 245305.

 https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.72.245305.

 (35)

Bernevig, B. A.; Hughes, T. L.; Zhang, S.-C. Quantum Spin Hall Effect and Topological

 Phase

Transition

 in

HgTe

Quantum

Wells.

Science

2006,

314

(5806),

1757–1761.

 https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1133734.

 (36)

Pan, T.-R.; Guo, A.-M.; Sun, Q.-F. Effect of Gate Voltage on Spin Transport along Alpha-

Helical Protein. Phys Rev B 2015, 92 (11), 115418. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.92.115418.

 (37)

Zhang, T.-Y.; Mao, Y.; Guo, A.-M.; Sun, Q.-F. Dynamical Theory of Chiral-Induced Spin

 Selectivity in Electron Donor–Chiral Molecule–Acceptor Systems. Phys. Rev. B 2025, 111 (20),

 205417. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.111.205417.

 (38)

Liu,

P.-Y.;

Zhang,

T.-Y.;

Sun,

Q.-F.

Dynamical

Simulation

of

Chiral-Induced

Spin-

Polarization

 and

Magnetization.

 J.

 Phys.

Chem.

 Lett.

 2025,

 6500–6506.

 https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.5c01179.

 22



(39)

Mishra, S.; Mondal, A. K.; Pal, S.; Das, T. K.; Smolinsky, E. Z. B.; Siligardi, G.; Naaman,

 R. Length-Dependent Electron

Spin Polarization in

Oligopeptides and

DNA. J. Phys. Chem.

C

 2020, 124 (19), 10776–10782. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.0c02291.

 (40)

Das, T. K.; Naaman, R.; Fransson, J. Insights into the Mechanism of Chiral-Induced Spin

 Selectivity: The Effect of Magnetic Field Direction and Temperature. Adv. Mater. 2024, 36 (29),

 2313708. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202313708.

 (41)

Chiesa, A.; Garlatti, E.; Mezzadri, M.; Celada, L.; Sessoli, R.; Wasielewski, M. R.; Bittl,

 R.; Santini, P.; Carretta, S. Many-Body Models for Chirality-Induced Spin Selectivity in Electron

 Transfer. Nano Lett. 2024, 24 (39), 12133–12139. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.4c02912.

 (42)

Fay, T. P.; Limmer, D. T. Origin of Chirality Induced Spin Selectivity in Photoinduced

 Electron

 Transfer.

 Nano

 Lett.

 2021,

 21

 (15),

 6696–6702.

 https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.1c02370.

 (43)

Carmeli, I.; Kumar, K. S.; Heifler, O.; Carmeli, C.; Naaman, R. Spin Selectivity in Electron

 Transfer

 in

Photosystem

 I.

Angew.

Chem.

 Int.

Ed.

2014,

53

 (34),

8953–8958.

 https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201404382.

 (44)

Ha, N. T. N.; Sharma, A.; Slawig, D.; Yochelis, S.; Paltiel, Y.; Zahn, D. R. T.; Salvan, G.;

 Tegenkamp, C. Charge-Ordered α-Helical Polypeptide Monolayers on Au(111). J. Phys. Chem. C

 2020, 124 (10), 5734–5739. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.0c00246.

 23





SUPPORTING INFORMATION



Spin-to-charge conversion modulated by chiral molecules

 Peng-Yi Liu,1 Tian-Yi Zhang,1 Ai-Min Guo,2 Yossi Paltiel,3,4 Qing-Feng Sun1,5*

 1International Center for Quantum Materials, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing, 100871,

 China.



2Hunan Key Laboratory for Super-microstructure and Ultrafast Process, School of Physics, Central South

 University, Changsha 410083, China.

 3Institute of Applied Physics, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 9190401, Israel.

 4Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 9190401,

 Israel.

 5Hefei National Laboratory, Hefei 230088, China.

 *Corresponding author: sunqf@pku.edu.cn

 Section S1: Model details ............................................................................................................... 2

Section S2: Sample geometry ......................................................................................................... 5

Section S3: Details of control groups ............................................................................................. 6

Section S4: Supplenmentary results................................................................................................ 7

Section S5: Supplementary references............................................................................................ 8

Section S6: Supplementary figures ............................................................................................... 11

 1











 Section S1: Model details

 Theoretical model framework

As the experimental setup,1 we construct a model consisting of a layer of metal with ISHE, a

ferromagnetic substrate, two voltage electrodes, and self-assembled chiral molecules, as

illustrated in Figures 1a and 1b. To study the electron transport, we discretize the entire system,

as shown in Figure S1. Below, we introduce each component in detail, presenting the

corresponding Hamiltonians and the couplings between them.

 Model of inverse spin Hall effect

 The gold layer is adopted to achieve the inverse spin Hall effect (ISHE) in Ref. 1 and many other

studies.2 However, there is evidence that the spin Hall effect (SHE) of gold is mainly contributed

by skew scattering,3 which is difficult to describe exactly by simple models. Here, we adopt a

SHE model similar to the Bernevig-Hughes-Zhang model,4 to simulate the SHE and ISHE in the

gold layer. In the tight-binding representation, the Hamiltonian is given by

 ܪௌுா = ෍ ܿ௫,௭

ற ܪ଴

ௌுாܿ௫,௭

௫,௭

+ ෍ ܿ௫ାଵ,௭ ௫,௭

ற ܪ௫

ௌுாܿ௫,௭

+ ෍ ܿ௫,௭ାଵ ௫,௭

ற ܪ௭

ௌுாܿ௫,௭

+ ℎ. ܿ.

(S1)

 Here, “ℎ. ܿ.” represents the Hermitian conjugation. The ݕ-direction can be considered

homogeneous, therefore the system is reduced to two dimensions, as shown in Figure S1. ܿ௫,௭ = [ܿ௫,௭;ः,↑, ܿ௫,௭;ऀ,↑, ܿ௫,௭;ः,↓, ܿ௫,௭;ऀ,↓]், with ܶ denoting transpose. (ݔ, ݖ) is the label of a site in the gold

layer, and ܿ௫,௭;ः(ऀ),↑(↓) is the annihilation operator of the electron at (ݔ, ݖ) with pseudospin ः or ऀ

and spin parallel or antiparallel to the direction of ࡮. ܿ௫,௭;ः(ऀ),↑(↓) operator. ܪ଴

 is the corresponding creation

 ௌுா are given by,

 ௌுா and ܪ௬

ௌுா, ܪ௫

ற

ܪ଴

ௌுா = ܧ଴(ݏ଴ ⊗ ߪ଴) − ܯ(ݏఈ ⊗ ߪ଴) − (݉ − 4ݐ)(ݏ଴ ⊗ ߪ௬)

ܪ௫

ௌுா = −ݐ൫ݏ଴ ⊗ ߪ௬൯ +

ܪ௭

ௌுா = −ݐ൫ݏ଴ ⊗ ߪ௬൯ +

iݐ 2 iݐ 2

(ݏ଴ ⊗ ߪ௫)

(ݏ௬ ⊗ ߪ௭).

(S2)

ܧ଴ is the on-site energy of the gold. ܯ is a very small Zeeman term due to the magnetic field. In

the spin space, ݏ଴, ݏ௫, ݏ௬, and ݏ௭ represent the unit matrix, the Pauli matrix in the ݔ, ݕ, and ݖ

directions, respectively. ݏఈ is the Pauli matrix with spin towards the direction of ࡮. ߪ଴, ߪ௫, ߪ௬,

and ߪ௭ represent Pauli matrices in the pseudospin space, which comes from the orbital degrees of

freedom of electrons in atoms of the ISHE system. The mass term ݉ and the hopping energy ݐ

are the parameters in the Bernevig-Hughes-Zhang model.



The ferromagnetic substrate (also seen as an electrode) and two electrodes are described by a

ற ܪ଴ simpler Hamiltonian ܪா = ∑ ܽ௫ᇱ,௭ᇱ ௫ᇱ,௭ᇱ ∑ + ℎ. ܿ., with ܪ଴ ܪ௭ −ݐ(ݏ଴ ⊗ ߪ଴). (ݔ′, ݖ′) is the label of a site in electrodes. ܽ௫ᇱ,௭ᇱ

ா = ܧ଴(ݏ଴ ⊗ ߪ଴) − ܯ(ݏఈ ⊗ ߪ଴) and ܪ௫ ற

 (ܽ௫ᇱ,௭ᇱ) represents the creation

 ற ܽ௫ᇱାଵ,௭ᇱ

ற ܽ௫ᇱ,௭ᇱାଵ

ா = ܪ௭

ாܽ௫ᇱ,௭ᇱ

ாܽ௫ᇱ,௭ᇱ

ாܽ௫ᇱ,௭ᇱ

ா =

+ ∑

ܪ௫

௫ᇱ,௭ᇱ

௫ᇱ,௭ᇱ

+

2













 (annihilation) operator of electrons in the electrodes at the site (ݔ′, ݖ′) and has the same basis as

ற

(ܿ௫,௭). ݐ, ܧ଴, and ܯ are the same as ܪௌுா. The coupling Hamiltonian between the gold layer

ܿ௫,௭ and electrodes is ܪ௖ only operates when (ݔ, ݖ) and (ݔ′, ݖ′) are the nearest neighbors (blue bonds in Figure S1). The

gold layer in our model has ܰ = 20 sites in the ݔ-direction and ܮ = 10 sites in the ݖ-direction.

The detailed size of our model is shown in Figure S1.

 ܽ௫ᇱ,௭ᇱ + ℎ. ܿ., where the summation Σ௫,௭;௫ᇱ,௭ᇱ

ற (ݏ଴ ⊗ ߪ଴)

ᇱ ௫,௭;௫ᇱ,௭ᇱ

ாܿ௫,௭ ݐ௖

ா = ∑

ᇱ

Chiral molecule

 The chiral molecules we used are the ߙ-helical proteins, which can be described by a tight- binding Hamiltonian including SOC,5–7

ܪெ = ܪ௠௢௟ + ܪௌை஼.

 ௅೛

ே೛ ܪ௠௢௟ = ෍ ቈ෍ ݀௡,௟ ௡ୀଵ ே೛

௟ୀଵ ௅೛ିଵ ܪௌை஼ = ෍ ෍ ෍ 2iݐ௦௝ cos ߮௟௝

ା ൫ܧ௣ݏ଴ − ܯݏఈ൯݀௡,௟

௅೛ି௟

௡ୀଵ

௟ୀଵ

௝ୀଵ

௅೛ିଵ

௅೛ି௟

+ ෍ ෍ ݐ௝݀௡,௟

ା ݏ଴݀௡,௟ା௝

௟ୀଵ

௝ୀଵ

+ ℎ. ܿ. ቉

,

(S3)

 ି ݀௡,௟

ା ݏ௟௝݀௡,௟ା௝

+ ℎ. ܿ.

ା , ݀௡,௟,↓

ା ] is the creation of electrons at site ݈ of the ݊-th molecule. Each molecule has

 ା = [݀௡,௟,↑ ݀௡,௟ ܮ௣ sites (i.e., the molecule length is ܮ௣), and there are ܰ௣ = ܰ/2 molecules coupled to the

surface of the gold. ܯ is the Zeeman term. ܧ௣ is the on-site energy of molecules. ݐ௝ = ݐଵ݁ି(௟ೕି௟భ)/௟೎ is the long-range hopping energy5,8 between site ݈ and site ݈ + ݆. Similarly, ݐ௦௝ = ݐ௦ଵ݁ି(௟ೕି௟భ)/௟೎ is the corresponding SOC. ݐ௝ and ݐ௦௝ decays with the exponent ݈௖. The geometry of

the ߙ-helical molecule can be described by the radius ܴ, the twist angle between the nearest sites

∆߮, and the pitch of the helix ∆ℎ. Then, the Euclidean distance between sites ݈ and ݈

+

݆ is ݈௝ = ඥ[2ܴ sin(݆∆߮/2)]ଶ + (݆∆ℎ)ଶ, and the corresponding space angle ߠ௝ = arccos[2ܴ sin(݆∆߮/2) / ା) sin ߠ௝ + ݏ௭′ cos ߠ௝, with

݈௝]. According to our previous result,5,9 ݏ௟௝ = (ݏ௫′ sin ߮௟௝ ߮௟௝ selectivity (CISS) effect, which we attribute to the interference of multi-path wave functions (see

Ref. 10). Considering that experiments have shown that the helical molecules form a tilt angle of

about ߨ/6 with the ݖ-direction when self-assembled on the surface of gold,1,11 we rotate the Pauli

matrix of the helical molecules accordingly ݏ௫(௬,௭) = exp(+iߨݏ௬/12) ݏ௫(௬,௭) exp(−iߨݏ௬/12).

That is, the molecules are set at a tilt angle of ߨ/6 with the ݖ-direction and an azimuthal angle

߮ = 0 (i.e., the helical axes of molecules are fixed at the ݔݖ-plane) as shown in Figure S1. In the

experiment, the azimuthal angles of chiral molecules in the ݔݕ-plane are considered to be

isotropic distributed rather than fixed.1 After considering the azimuthal freedom, our model is

still valid, as we discussed in Section S4 and Figure S8.

 ± = [(݊ + ݆) ± ݊]∆߮/2. This model can successfully simulate the chiral-induced spin

 ା − ݏ௬′ cos ߮௟௝

ᇱ

The coupling Hamiltonian between the gold layer and molecules is ܪ஼

ெ.

 ܪ஼

ெ = ෍ ݐ௖

ା ெ݀௡,ଵ

ே೛

௡ୀଵ

[ݏ଴ ⨂ (1, 1)] ൣܿ(ଶ௡ିଵ,௅) + ܿ(ଶ௡,௅)൧ + ℎ. ܿ.

(S4)

 3











 Where ݖ = ܮ represents the surface of the gold. The ݊-th molecule is coupled to the (2݊ − 1)-

and 2݊-th site of the surface, as shown in Figure S1.

 Dephasing effect

 In real systems, impurities with degrees of freedom, electron-electron interaction, and electron- phonon interaction inevitably cause the loss of phase memory of electrons.12 Similarly, it is

generally believed that dephasing plays a role in molecules as well.13,14 Consequently, we

incorporate the dephasing effect into both the ISHE system and the chiral molecules. This is

achieved by utilizing the widely adopted Büttiker virtual electrodes, which introduce a phase- breaking mechanism to electrons.15–17 We attach a virtual electrode to each site of the gold layer

and molecules. Electrons can go into and out of the virtual electrodes with the loss of phase

memory. The Hamiltonian of the virtual electrodes is described by ܪ஽ = ∑ ∑ ߝ(݇)Ψ(௫,௭)௞ + ∑ ∑ ߝ(݇)Ψ(௡,௟)௞ ௞ electrons in the virtual electrode coupled to the gold site (ݔ, ݖ) with momentum ݇. Ψ(௡,௟)௞ creation operator in the virtual electrode coupled to the ݈-th site of the ݊-th molecule with

momentum ݇. Ψ(௫,௭)௞ ற (Ψ(௡,௟)௞,↑ electrodes and real sites in the system is ܪ஼

). ߝ(݇) is the spectrum of each virtual electrode. The coupling between virtual



is the creation operator of

 ற = (Ψ(௫,௭)௞,ः↑

, where Ψ(௫,௭)௞

), and Ψ(௡,௟)௞

ற Ψ(௫,௭)௞

ற

, Ψ(௫,௭)௞,ऀ↓

ற

, Ψ(௫,௭)௞,ऀ↑

ற

, Ψ(௫,௭)௞,ः↓

ற Ψ(௡,௟)௞

ற

, Ψ(௡,௟)௞,↓

 is the

 ஽.

 =

௫,௭

௡,௟

௞

ற

ற

ற

ற

ܪ஼

஽ = ෍ ෍ ݐௗΨ(௫,௭)௞ (௫,௭)

௞

ற

(ݏ଴ ⨂ߪ଴)ܿ௫,௭

+ ෍ ෍ ݐௗΨ(௡,௟)௞ ௡,௟

௞

ற

ݏ଴݀௡,௟

+ ℎ. ܿ.

(S5)

 Transport formulation

 According to the three subsections above, the total Hamiltonian of our system includes the

electrodes, SHE system, chiral molecules, virtual electrodes, and their coupling ܪ௧௢௧ = ܪா + ஽. We label all electrodes with integers ݌ = 1,2,3, …. As

ܪௌுா + ܪெ + ܪ஽ + ܪ஼ shown in Figure S1, we set ݌ = 1 for the ferromagnetic substrate, ݌ = 2, 3 for electrodes

measuring the Hall voltage, and ݌ > 3 for virtual electrodes.

 ெ + ܪ஼

ா + ܪ஼

The calculation of electron transport is given by the Landauer-Büttiker formula,18



௦ = ܫ௣

݁ଶ ℎ

௦௦ᇲ ෍ ܶ௣௤ ௤,௦ᇲ

൫ܸ௣

௦ᇲ ௦ − ܸ௤

൯

(S6)

 ௦ is the charge current with spin-ݏ from the ݌-th electrode to the system. ݏ, ݏᇱ =↑, ↓

 where ܫ௣ represents the spin parallel or anti-parallel with ࡮. ܸ௣ ௦௦ᇲ th electrodes with spin-ݏ (ݏ’). ܶ௣௤ electrode with spin-ݏ′ to the ݌-th electrode with spin-ݏ. With the non-equilibrium Green

ୱᇲ ௦௦ᇲ ୱ(ܧி)۵௥(ܧி)ડ୯ function, the transmission coefficient is given by ܶ௣௤ The retarded Green function ۵௥(ܧ) = [۵௔(ܧ)]ற = [ܧ − ۶ௌுா − ۶ெ − Σ௣઱௣,௦ ௥ (ܧ) − ઱௣,௦ linewidth function ડ୮

(ܧி)۵௔(ܧி)].19

௥ (ܧ)]ିଵ, and the

௔ (ܧ)], where the bold letters represent the matrix



is the transmission coefficient of electrons from the ݍ-th

 ௦ᇱ) represents the voltage of the ݌- (ݍ-)

 ୱ(ܧ) = i[઱௣,௦

= Tr[ડ୮

௦ (ܸ௤

4











 ௔ (ܧ)]ற is the retarded self-energy introduced by the coupling of the ݌-th electrodes with spin-

under the tight-binding representation. The Fermi energy is set to be zero ܧி = 0. ઱௣,௦ [઱௣,௦ ݏ. For the first three electrodes, we use a numerical method to obtain their self-energy (53). For

virtual electrodes, ઱௣வଷ,௦ states in each virtual electrode and Γୢ the dephasing strength.16,17



ଶ = −iΓୢ/2 is energy independent, with ߩ being the density of

 = −iߨߩݐௗ

௥

௥ (ܧ) =

↑ = ܸ଴. While for other electrodes, ܸ௣வଵ

Considering the Fermi energy splitting of FMR, a spin bias is applied to the first electrode ܸଵ ↑ = ܸ௣வଵ . Since there is no net charge current for

−ܸଵ voltage electrodes (the 2nd and 3rd electrodes) and the dephasing process, ܫ௣வଵ ௦ and ܸ௣ these conditions, ܫ௣ the ferromagnetic/gold interface is ܫ௦ = −ℏ(ܫଵ ܸଶ zero exactly due to the current conservation.

 ↓ = 0. With

௦ can be solved from Eq. (6) for any ݌ and ݏ. The spin current through

↓)/(2݁), and the Hall voltage is given by ܸு =

↑. The charge current through the ferromagnetic/gold interface is ܫ௖ = ܫଵ

↑ + ܫ௣வଵ

↓, which is

 ↑ − ܸଷ

↑ + ܫଵ

↑ − ܫଵ

↓

↓ =

Model parameters

 Unlike the original application of the Bernevig-Hughes-Zhang model in quantum SHE (33), we

set ݉ = 0.2, ݐ = 1, and ܧ଴ = −0.61 to ensure that the Fermi surface lies in the conduction band,

resulting in a metallic SHE.20 The geometric parameters of chiral molecules we used are the

same as our previous work:5 ܴ = 0.25nm, ∆߮ = 5ߨ/9, ∆ℎ = 0.15nm, and ݈௖ = 0.09nm.

Considering that the hopping energy in gold is approximately on the order of electron volts,

while the hopping in organic molecules is on the order of 100meV,21 we set ݐଵ = ݐ/25 = 0.04ݐ.

We use a smaller SOC than our previous work ݐ௦ଵ = 0.05ݐଵ, which is about a few meV and close

to the experimental values.22,23 The dephasing strength is set to be energy-independent Γୢ = 0.02ݐଵ, and we explore the dephasing dependence of the effect in Figure S7. The small Zeeman

ா = term is ܯ = 0.03ݐଵ = 0.0012ݐ for ܪௌுா, ܪா, and ܪெ. The coupling strengths are given by ݐ௖ ெ = 0.64ݐ. In Figures 2 and 3, we use ܮ௣ = 20 and ܧ௣ = 0.57ݐଵ. In Figure 4, other

0.5ݐ and ݐ௖ lengths of molecules and the on-site energy of molecules are ൫ܮ௣, ܧ௣൯ = (12, 0.36ݐଵ),

(25, 0.73ݐଵ), and (40, 1.15ݐଵ).

 Section S2: Sample geometry

 Geometric details

The microscopic schematic diagram of our model is shown in Figure S1. In real calculations, we

use the system size ܰ = 20 and ܮ = 10 instead of the size in the schematic diagram. The gold

layer in the real experiment1 is about 4nm ~ 10 lattice constants of gold, which is the same as ܮ.

Each chiral molecule maintains a 30-degree angle with the ݖ-direction to self-assemble stably, as

described in the main text. As a reasonable simplification, we adopt a square lattice and couple

the first site of each molecule to the metal surface (see the Methods in the main text). The ݕ-

5















 direction of the lattice is considered homogeneously and does not appear directly in the

calculation.

 ா + ܪ஽′ + ܪ஼

஽′, where ܪ஽′ + ܪ஼

Symmetry analysis without chiral molecules

When no molecule is involved, the Hamiltonian of the system is given by ܪ′ = ܪௌுா + ܪா + ஽′

contains only virtual electrodes coupled to the gold layer

ܪ஼ (the ISHE system). Then, we can define four types of symmetry operations. (I) The unitary

rotation operators in spin space ࣯෠(ݏ௫, ߠ) = exp(−iߠݏ௫/2). (II) The unitary rotation operators in

pseudospin space ࣯෠൫ߪ௬, ߠ൯ = exp(−iߠߪ௬/2). (III) The mirror operation about the red dashed

line ℳ෡

in Figure S1. (IV) The operation ࣪෠ replaces the Zeeman term ܯ with −ܯ. It can be

verified that all five terms in ܪ′ remain invariant under the joint operation ࣱ෡ = ࣯෠(ݏ௫, ߨ) ∘ ࣯෠൫ߪ௬, ߨ൯ ∘ ℳ෡ ∘ ࣪෠. After applying ࣱ෡

to the system, the spin direction of the spin current

reverses and the positions of the two electrodes for measuring Hall voltage are interchanged.

Therefore, −ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ) = ܸு(ߙ, −ܤ) is strictly true without the participation of molecules.

 Section S3: Details of control groups

 As mentioned in the main text, we simulate the racemic mixture by assigning each molecule a

50% probability of being L-α-helix and a 50% probability of being D-α-helix. The calculation

results are averaged over 1000 sets of random configurations, as shown in Figures 2h and 2i.

Here, we present the standard deviation of 1000 sets of data to support the results in the main

text, as the error bars in Figure S3. It can be observed that the data for positive and negative

magnetic fields slightly deviate beyond the coverage range of the error bars. However, the

magnitude of deviations remains relatively small, which suggests the racemic mixture cannot

introduce chiral-induced asymmetry. These minor deviations are attributed to the mismatch in

pseudospin (orbital degree of freedom) between the molecular model and the ISHE model, which

breaks the pseudospin rotation symmetry.

 Another control group uses achiral molecules, whose Hamiltonian only includes simple one- dimensional chains. ܪெ = ∑ .

+ ℎ. ܿ. ቃ The symbol definitions here are the same as those in the main text. We use ݐଵ = 1/25, ܧ௣ = 0.2ݐଵ, and ܯ = 0.03ݐଵ for Figures 2k, 2l, S4b.

 ା ൫ܧ௣ݏ଴ − ܯݏఈ൯݀௡,௟

௅೛ ቂ∑ ݀௡,௟ ௟ୀଵ

ା ݏ଴݀௡,௟ାଵ

௅೛ିଵ ௟ୀଵ

ݐଵ݀௡,௟

ே೛ ௡ୀଵ

+ ∑

We can also use the effective spin selectivity ܵ(ߙ) defined in the main text to test the control

groups. The results are shown in Figures S4a and S4b, with parameters the same as those in

Figure 2. Compared with the notable spin selectivity of chiral molecules in Figure 3b, the spin

selectivity of the two control groups is close to 0, which can support the asymmetry in Figure 2a- 2f is caused by chirality. The slight deviation of ܵ(ߙ) from 0 arises from the mismatch between

ܪௌுா containing pseudospin and ܪெ without pseudospin. If we use molecules containing

pseudospin, the control group can also maintain ܵ(ߙ) = 0 exactly. For example, if ܪெ = + ∑ ∑

and ܪ஼

ା ൫ܧ௣ݏ଴⨂ߪ଴ − ܯݏఈ⨂ߪ଴൯݀௡,௟ (ݏ଴⨂ߪ଴)ൣܿ(ଶ௡ିଵ,௅) + ܿ(ଶ௡,௅)൧ + ℎ. ܿ., the spin selectivity will become zero with any

 ௅೛ ቂ∑ ݀௡,௟ ௟ୀଵ ା ெ݀௡,ଵ ݐ௖

ା (ݏ଴⨂ߪ଴)݀௡,௟ାଵ

+ ℎ. ܿ. ቃ

௅೛ିଵ ௟ୀଵ

ݐଵ݀௡,௟

ெ =

∑

ே೛ ௡ୀଵ ே೛ ௡ୀଵ

6



















 ெ and ܧ௣, as shown in Figure S4c (here, we use the same ݐ஼ ݐ஼ Figure 2).

 ெ and ܧ௣ as chiral molecules in

 Section S4: Supplenmentary results

 The Hall voltages and spin currents in the polar coordinate systems

Plotting the absolute value of Hall voltages |ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ)| in a polar coordinate system can provide

a clear comparison of the different modulation effects of different chirality on the ISHE. As

shown in Figure S5a, |ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ)| with the racemic mixture shows no difference for the ±ݖ- direction. But the results of L-α-helix (D-α-helix) are notably shifted to ߙ = ߨ/2 (−ߨ/2).

Similar shifts can be observed from the results of spin current ܫ௦(ߙ, +ܤ), as shown in Figure

S5b. These asymmetries are due to the fact of CISS that L-α-helix molecules we used prefer spin

currents with spin towards the +ݖ-direction, while D-α-helix molecules prefer spin currents with

spin towards the −ݖ-direction. As we discussed in the main text: The asymmetry of |ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ)|

is most obvious at ߙ ≈ ±ߨ/4, ±3ߨ/4 and disappears at ߙ = 0, ±ߨ/2, ±ߨ. The asymmetry of

ܫ௦(ߙ, +ܤ) is most obvious at ߙ = ±ߨ/2 and disappears at ߙ = 0, ±ߨ.

 The length dependence of chiral modulation with D-α-helix molecules

In the main text, the length dependence of the modulation strength for L-α-helix molecules is

discussed in Figure 4. In this Supporting Information, we also show the Hall voltages and spin

selectivity of D-α-helix molecules with four different lengths, as shown in Figure S6. The Hall

voltage of molecules with different lengths all show similar asymmetry (Figure S6a), and the

spin selectivity is positively correlated with the molecular length (Figure S6b). Compared with

the results of L-α-helix in Figure 4, the results for D-α-helix molecules give the opposite

modulation and the same behavior of length dependence.

 The dephasing dependence of ISHE and spin selectivity with L-α-helix molecules

Dephasing is considered to play an important role in CISS, so we explored the influence of

dephasing strength on the effect. As shown in Figure S7a, ISHE with different dephasing

strengths all show chiral-induced asymmetry, although the specific values are slightly different.

Correspondingly, we calculated the spin selectivity ܵ at each dephasing strength, as shown in

Figure S7b. It can be seen that the dephasing strength modulates the magnitude of this effect. As

shown in Figure S7c, with the dephasing increasing from almost zero to very strong, ܵ first

increases and then decreases, which aligns well with both theoretical5,9,24 and experimental25

studies of CISS. Within a wide range of parameters, CISS can notably modulate ISHE.

 The average of the random azimuthal angles

When self-assembling on the gold surface, helical molecules do not align their helical axes

perpendicularly to the surface but rather form an angle of approximately 60° with respect to the

sample surface.1,11 Consequently, in our numerical simulations, we similarly maintain a 30°

angle between the helical axes of the chiral molecules and the ݖ-axis. Specifically, considering

each chiral molecule with its initial helical axis oriented towards the +ݖ-direction, we rotate it by

30° around the ݕ-axis to achieve the configuration depicted in Figure S1. Since SOC in chiral

molecules is dependent on the orientation of the helical axis,5 this rotation influences the Pauli

 7



















 matrices within ܪௌை஼, through the transformation mentioned in the main text ݏ௫(௬,௭) exp(+iߨݏ௬/12) ݏ௫(௬,௭) exp(−iߨݏ௬/12).



ᇱ

=

Experiments show that the helical axes of these molecules also have freely valued azimuthal

angles. Molecules with the same azimuthal angle form domains, and the experimental results are

the combined outcomes of molecules in many different domains.1 So, we introduce an additional

rotation of each chiral molecule around the ݖ-axis based on the settings in Figure S1. This

rotation displaces the helical axis out of the ݔݖ-plane, resulting in an azimuthal angle ߮ in the

ݔݕ-plane, as shown in Figure S8a. As a result, the Pauli matrices are correspondingly rotated

ᇱᇱ ݏ௫(௬,௭) isotropically distributed in the experimental scale,1 we calculated 1000 sets of random

configurations. In each randomly generated configuration, the azimuthal angle of each chiral

molecule is uniformly and randomly chosen from the interval [0,2ߨ). The average results of

1000 sets of configurations are shown in Figure S8.

 exp(−i߮ݏ௭/2). Since the azimuthal angles of the helical axes are

 = exp(+i߮ݏ௭/2) ݏ௫(௬,௭)

ᇱ

Figures S8b and S8c respectively show the average Hall voltages of L-α-helix and D-α-helix

molecules. Comparing with Figures 2c and 2f, these results show small deformation and similar

asymmetries. This indicates that the model in the main text is reasonable for explaining the

modulation of chiral molecules even if random azimuthal angles are considered. These

asymmetries can also be clearly shown by plotting |ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ)| in a polar coordinate system.

Similar to the results of fixed azimuthal angle (shown in Figure S5a), the average results of

random azimuthal angles (shown in Figure S8d) indeed show a shift to ߙ = ߨ/2 (−ߨ/2) for L-α- helix (D-α-helix) molecules, as a result of CISS. The magnitude of the shift is slightly reduced

due to the averaging of molecules whose helical axes are not in the ݔݖ-plane, but the shape

remains very consistent with Figure S5a. At last, we compare the summation of Hall voltages

Σܸு = ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ) + ܸு(ߙ, −ܤ) under opposite ࡮ between fixed and average random azimuthal

angles, as shown in Figures S8e and Figures S8f. After the average of random azimuthal angles,

both the results of L-α-helix and D-α-helix molecules show the same behavior as the results with

the fixed azimuthal angle, except for slight deformation and reduced amplitude. We attribute this

small deformation to the mismatch between the SHE model and the chiral molecular model,

similar to the discussion in the control groups. In summary, Figure S8 shows that our calculation

results and discussion in the main text can explain the experimental results, even with the

variability in azimuthal angles.

 Section S5: Supplementary references

 (1)

Moharana, A.; Kapon, Y.; Kammerbauer, F.; Anthofer, D.; Yochelis, S.; Shema, H.; Gross,

E.; Kläui, M.; Paltiel, Y.; Wittmann, A. Chiral-Induced Unidirectional Spin-to-Charge

Conversion. Sci. Adv. 2025, 11 (1), eado4285. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.ado4285.

 (2)

Sinova, J.; Valenzuela, S. O.; Wunderlich, J.; Back, C. H.; Jungwirth, T. Spin Hall Effects.

Rev Mod Phys 2015, 87 (4), 1213–1260. https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.87.1213.

 8

















 (3)

 Isasa, M.; Villamor, E.; Hueso, L. E.; Gradhand, M.; Casanova, F. Temperature

Dependence of Spin Diffusion Length and Spin Hall Angle in Au and Pt. Phys Rev B 2015,

91 (2), 024402. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.91.024402.

 (4)

Bernevig, B. A.; Hughes, T. L.; Zhang, S.-C. Quantum Spin Hall Effect and Topological

Phase Transition in HgTe Quantum Wells. Science 2006, 314 (5806), 1757–1761.

https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1133734.

 (5)

Guo, A.-M.; Sun, Q.-F. Spin-Dependent Electron Transport in Protein-like Single-Helical

 Molecules. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2014, 111 (32), 11658–11662.

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1407716111.

 (6)

Zhang, T.-Y.; Mao, Y.; Guo, A.-M.; Sun, Q.-F. Dynamical Theory of Chiral-Induced Spin

Selectivity in Electron Donor–Chiral Molecule–Acceptor Systems. Phys. Rev. B 2025, 111

(20), 205417. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.111.205417.

 (7)

Liu, P.-Y.; Zhang, T.-Y.; Sun, Q.-F. Dynamical Simulation of Chiral-Induced Spin-

Polarization and Magnetization. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2025, 6500–6506.

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.5c01179.

 (8)

Endres, R. G.; Cox, D. L.; Singh, R. R. P. Colloquium: The Quest for High-Conductance

 DNA. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2004, 76 (1), 195–214.

https://doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.76.195.

 (9)

Guo, A.-M.; Sun, Q. Spin-Selective Transport of Electrons in DNA Double Helix. Phys.

Rev. Lett. 2012, 108 (21), 218102. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.218102.

 (10)

Pan, T.-R.; Guo, A.-M.; Sun, Q.-F. Spin-Polarized Electron Transport through Helicene

 Molecular Junctions. Phys Rev B 2016, 94 (23), 235448.

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.94.235448.

 (11)

Ha, N. T. N.; Sharma, A.; Slawig, D.; Yochelis, S.; Paltiel, Y.; Zahn, D. R. T.; Salvan, G.;

 Tegenkamp, C. Charge-Ordered α-Helical Polypeptide Monolayers on Au(111). J. Phys.

Chem. C 2020, 124 (10), 5734–5739. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.0c00246.

 (12)

Stern, A.; Aharonov, Y.; Imry, Y. Phase Uncertainty and Loss of Interference: A General

Picture. Phys Rev A 1990, 41 (7), 3436–3448. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevA.41.3436.

 (13)

Morita, T.; Kimura, S. Long-Range Electron Transfer over 4 Nm Governed by an Inelastic

Hopping Mechanism in Self-Assembled Monolayers of Helical Peptides. J. Am. Chem. Soc.

2003, 125 (29), 8732–8733. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja034872n.

 (14)

Skourtis, S. S.; Balabin, I. A.; Kawatsu, T.; Beratan, D. N. Protein Dynamics and Electron

 Transfer: Electronic Decoherence and Non-Condon Effects. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2005,

102 (10), 3552–3557. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0409047102.

 (15)

Büttiker, M. Role of Quantum Coherence in Series Resistors. Phys. Rev. B 1986, 33 (5),

 3020–3026. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.33.3020.

 (16)

Xing, Y.; Sun, Q.; Wang, J. Influence of Dephasing on the Quantum Hall Effect and the

 Spin Hall Effect. Phys. Rev. B 2008, 77 (11), 115346.

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.77.115346.

 9







 (17)

Jiang, H.; Cheng, S.; Sun, Q.; Xie, X. C. Topological Insulator: A New Quantized Spin Hall

 Resistance Robust to Dephasing. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 103 (3), 036803.

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.103.036803.

 (18)

Datta, S. Electronic Transport in Mesoscopic Systems; Cambridge University Press:

 Cambridge, 1995. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511805776.

 (19)

Meir, Y.; Wingreen, N. S. Landauer Formula for the Current through an Interacting

 Electron Region. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1992, 68 (16), 2512–2515.

https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.68.2512.

 (20)

Brüne, C.; Roth, A.; Buhmann, H.; Hankiewicz, E. M.; Molenkamp, L. W.; Maciejko, J.;

 Qi, X.-L.; Zhang, S.-C. Spin Polarization of the Quantum Spin Hall Edge States. Nat. Phys.

2012, 8 (6), 485–490. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphys2322.

 (21)

YAN, Y. J.; ZHANG, H. TOWARD THE MECHANISM OF LONG-RANGE CHARGE

 TRANSFER IN DNA: THEORIES AND MODELS. J. Theor. Comput. Chem. 2002, 01

(01), 225–244. https://doi.org/10.1142/S0219633602000154.

 (22)

Kuemmeth, F.; Ilani, S.; Ralph, D. C.; McEuen, P. L. Coupling of Spin and Orbital Motion

 of Electrons in Carbon Nanotubes. Nature 2008, 452 (7186), 448–452.

https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06822.

 (23)

Steele, G. A.; Pei, F.; Laird, E. A.; Jol, J. M.; Meerwaldt, H. B.; Kouwenhoven, L. P. Large

 Spin-Orbit Coupling in Carbon Nanotubes. Nat. Commun. 2013, 4 (1), 1573.

https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms2584.

 (24)

Fay, T. P.; Limmer, D. T. Origin of Chirality Induced Spin Selectivity in Photoinduced

 Electron Transfer. Nano Lett. 2021, 21 (15), 6696–6702.

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.1c02370.

 (25)

Carmeli, I.; Kumar, K. S.; Heifler, O.; Carmeli, C.; Naaman, R. Spin Selectivity in Electron

 Transfer in Photosystem I. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2014, 53 (34), 8953–8958.

https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.201404382.

 10









 Section S6: Supplementary figures

 Figure S1. The microscopic schematic diagram of the model. The gold atoms and electrode

atoms are represented by yellow and white dots, respectively. The solid orange lines, solid gray

lines, solid blue lines, and dashed green lines represent the coupling within gold, within

electrodes, between gold and electrodes, and between gold and molecules, respectively. The

coordinate here is the same as that in Figure 1a in the main text. The electrode covered in gray

represents the ferromagnetic substrate, labeled with a red “1”. The two electrodes in the ݔ- direction, labeled with “2” and “3”, are used to measure the Hall voltage. All three electrodes

extend along the dashed grey lines. The model except for the molecules is geometrically

symmetric about the red dashed line. In this schematic diagram, the width of the gold layer in the

ݔ-direction is ܰ = 10, and the width in the ݖ-direction is ܮ = 5. In real calculations, we fix ܰ = 20 and ܮ = 10.

 11













 Figure S2. The comparison of the same physical quantities in the simulation and

experiment. (a), (b), and (c) are the simulated ISHE signal with L-α-helix molecules, ISHE

signal with D-α-helix molecules, and spin selectivity, respectively. (d), (e), and (f) are the

corresponding experimental results. The simulation and experimental results show a high degree

of similarity. (a-c) are the same as Figures 2c, 2f, and 3b in the main text. (d-f) are reproduced

from Ref. 1 under the terms of the Creative Commons CC BY license.

 Figure S3. The data of racemic mixture with error bar. (a and b) are the averaged results of

the spin currents and ISHE voltages, the same as Figures 2h and 2i, respectively, with error bars

show the standard deviation of 1000 configurations.

 12





















 Figure S4 The effective spin selectivity of control groups. (a) The effective spin selectivity

ܵ(ߙ) with the racemic mixture. (b) ܵ(ߙ) with the achiral molecules. (c) ܵ(ߙ) with achiral

molecules which have the pseudo-spin degree of freedom. The parameters used in Figure S4 are

mentioned in Section S3.

 Figure S5 The Hall voltages and spin currents in the polar coordinate systems. (a) The

absolute values of Hall voltages |ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ)| with L-α-helix, D-α-helix, and racemic mixed

molecules are shown in red, green, and blue curves, respectively. (b) The spin currents ܫ௦(ߙ, +ܤ)

with L-α-helix, D-α-helix, and racemic mixed molecules are shown in different colors. The

results of L- (D-) α-helix molecules show a preference for the spin current and Hall effect with

ߙ = ߨ/2 (−ߨ/2). The results with the racemic mixture are almost the average of those with L-α- helix and D-α-helix molecules. The parameters used here are the same as in Figure 2.

 13



















 Figure S6 The length dependence of the modulation with D-α-helix molecules. The minus

Hall voltages −ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ) [in (a)] and the effective spin selectivity ܵ(ߙ) [in (b)] with four

different lengths of molecules ܮ௣ = 12, 20, 25, and 40 are shown in different colors. Here, we

use the D-α-helix molecules and the parameters are the same as Figure 4 in the main text.

 Figure S7 The dephasing dependence of ISHE and spin selectivity with L-α-helix molecules.

The minus Hall voltages −ܸு(ߙ, +ܤ) [in (a)] and the effective spin selectivity ܵ(ߙ) [in (b)] with

different dephasing strength Γௗ from 0.005 to 0.07 are shown in different colors. (c) The spin

selectivity of two fixed ߙ varies with the dephasing strength Γௗ. It can be seen that as dephasing

increases from almost zero to very strong, the spin selectivity first strengthens and then weakens.

Here, we use the L-α-helix molecules and the other parameters are the same as Figures 2 and 3 in

the main text.

 14





















 Figure S8 The average results of chiral molecules with random azimuthal angles. (a) The

schematic diagram of a self-assembled L-α-helix molecule, with the green arrow showing the

helical axis. The orientation of the coordinate system here is identical to that in Figure 1 and

Figure S1. The molecular helical axis maintains 30° to the ݖ-axis and an azimuthal angle ߮

within the ݔݕ-plane. In Figure S1, all molecules have ߮ = 0 and are fixed in the ݔݖ-plane. In

Figure S8, each molecule has a random ߮ ∈ [0,2ߨ), and the results are averaged according to

Section S4. The average Hall voltages ܸு (under ±ܤ) of L-α-helix and D-α-helix molecules with

random azimuthal angles are shown in (b) and (c), respectively. (d) provides the averaged

absolute value of the Hall voltages in a polar coordinate. Data with L-α-helix and D-α-helix

molecules are shown in red and green curves, respectively. (e) and (f) show the comparison of

Σܸு between the results of fixed azimuthal angle and the average results of random azimuthal

angle. The dark red (green) curve shows the results of L-α-helix (D-α-helix) molecules with

fixed azimuthal angle, and light red (green) shows the average results of L-α-helix (D-α-helix)

molecules with random azimuthal angles. The parameters used here are the same as those in

Figures 2a-2f, and the average details are provided in the Section S4.

 15











 